sorry guys my money is running low... I can't keep this up... replacing myself with a markov chain effective immediately Youtube why did you have to move the comments button upwards and put the "Save" button in its place. I literally did not ask for this. Trying to then remove the short is so janky too. Go away I don't want you. my trilime creature look at my esobug for thje esowiki of esolangs . cc0 btw it is a free soul!! ART FIGHT ATTACKS 2 OF 2 all of the attacks I made during art fight were drawn in Tecknar!! SORRY FOR REPOST I FORGOT TO ADD THE LAST IMAGE LOL Hey I wonder if youtube is refusing to push my most recent post with Lots Of Art because it contains a lot of links. I hope not. Please go view it ART FIGHT ATTACKS 1 OF 2 oh my god I need to make so much lore real everything documented is getting increasingly quickly outdated the more I wait oh god oh god amazing interaction I had in context with the previous post a: "aaden why did you sexualize the cat" "what? ??" b: "do you not see it?" "no ??" consider the possibilities......... and I mean hypothetically because I have not the plans nor the capability to try selling this lmao my school just happens to be cool like that second image in original quality:  hahaha youtube! you're so genius for making the menu bar hide away when the user scrolls down in an attempt to make them forget they have the choice of leaving so they continue to scroll for much longer! Too Bad I Notice sell him hmmmmmmmmmmmmmm 3 catto by fnord redid the punctuation cattos a bit. be awesome and add your own rules to your ec-like instead of trying to copy the element idea &amp;lt;3 be a little esoteric if I may add The. The notation is described here......  top 10 easiest tricks to lure a swedish rock to you source:  my take on anthro magnetite, inspired by oxygendox's designs and fnord's drawing of him AUHGUGGHHU why must his limbs be so hard to draw. Hmmm?? Terrible !!!! Never drawing him like this ever again do you remember the 17533nd night of september ignore my calculation fumble I've been wanting to make videos on my esolangs for some time but. I don't know how to write scripts apparently Lmao! Well that's a lie. I do. but not in a way that is natural! Give me 25 more years perhspassps all of the channels desperately trying to ban the "fix anti viral spiral bedrock mojang" comments are going to have a really bad scunthorpe later VARIOUS fnord FAN ARTS look atr myt varioius art styles.!! I think they are distinct art styles see making the cellua cells into cats is actually my evil tactic to grow a fanbase for the game for when cellua 3d eventually releases and cell machine is mainstream again Some doodles. When The Aaden Is The Boy 😂😂😂😂🤣🤣🤣🤣 fan art of fnord's nightmare ... scary .. ...... ...!!! lookie!!:  updated xavier's page to be not contradictory with the established lore guys I have ANOTHER sona . ..... . woah . .. ... ... in spirit I now have an account on toyhouse if any of you exist there! not sure what I'll use it for other than as a THIRD collection of all of my characters Oh hey, here's an animation I never released. fancy flashy lyric video except the instruments and percussion are transcribed with narrow IPA instead of trying to onomatopoeize them lol sorry for my dead silence currently actively cooking. and trying my darnedest to not procrastinate An anonymous person asked: "how’d you make the aadenboy wiki and host it via github pages? is there a tutorial you used? asking because im looking into possibly doing a similar (unrelated) thing…" I did the entire setup myself, and it's not too hard to get working! All that's essentially happening is that I host and edit the wiki locally on my machine, then I use a Lua script to fetch the necessary pages and make them (better) usable for static hosting. I decided to write a more thorough blog page that details how I've got the wiki set up, if you or anyone else is looking to do the same thing. remake of an older art with the ship ! commentary on image 2: WOW OLDERT ART apparently I'm not a prpoportions person . LOOK AT THEIR TAILS THEY'RE LITTLE NUBS !!! THEY'RE SMALL !!! WTF !!! He's interested in art and not linguistics... What the helly... Times really have changed They really have grown! you can tell it's old because the dialogue is very unnatural as you might've suspected! I enjoyed the idea! but not enough to put it in the main thing... thus I am making a fanfiction of my own canon and throwing these two into an alternate universe Hahaha . Where are they? Uhmmmmmmmmm. Iunno man......... GOD DAMN IT STOP MAKING ALL OF YOUR PREEXISTING CHARACTERS SHAPESHIFTERS. NO. YOU DON'T GET TO HAVE THS ONE. STOP IT YOU FOOL. NO. NO MORE. BE CREATIVE. SMH. various aa tumblr asks youtube won't let me post all nine images at the same time for whatever reason, I'll include links after the transcriptions glorious aa drawn by fnord and sent to my inbox ❤️❤️❤️ my critter!!!! the marbling looks well done despite tecknar not having the smudging feature that I like to use so Tasty remained pissing off the cook original quality + transcription: Images three and four are the first image minus the padding—please see the link to view as one image. these newcomers ain't even trying anymore man...! that's literally just sharpie ink on this guy! hope you don't mind my ten billion postings of this fool he is my new favorite because he is me APOLOGIES FOR YOUTUBE'S ABYSMAL QUALITY. HAVE LINKS TO THE ORIGINAL IMAGES: aa ref sheet AND wiki page!!! woah!!!!! (also art fight..... but that's not until Next Year) please do NOT make my cursor have a damn THING following it..... if I enter your website I should not be subject to you putting an animated image onto it or some weird circle following me or confetti flying out of it! that is Too much!!! it is Not cozy or fun or silly it is Very disconcerting!!! Please!!!!!! some more of me because I love myself :P hehehehe need to be more silly ... so I turned myself into a Silly little guy!!! little goober!!! squishy liquid thing I think .? he's a Something....... updated the wiki (mostly internally), hopefully it's a little more functional and accurate now interesting Poll ermm idk man happy december 244th, 2025 he just goes around and mimics whatever he sees........ I am cooking so hard right now lmao I was doomed from the start of this art fight when like ten gazillion people attacked me whilst I was getting my characters published... my 15.85% attack ratio is as good as I'm gonna get it! xavier would watch metalworking and masonry videos like one would a mukbang. pottery? bladesmithing? CNC machining? all top notch entertainment for him! but those same videos are also way too tantalizing so I imagine he has access to a large shop just to participate erm. . . . barium isotope? ? ??what the helly! nihonium-285 by SebzHRE wikipedia predicted spamton IPA LOOKIE Hi um if you read that cags are a species this is actually False they are Not a species I think. I don't think they would be a species here's what I was able to get done if you're curious! theoretically there would be more minigames but Erm. That takes too much time. like to get this working took like two to four hours I think and a lot of it was fiddling with the easing lemme tell ya trying to tween crap is either going to be very easy or the worst experience you've ever had. usually the former but in this case it was a pisser! learn to tween through code learn the math it is a good experience. get a good simple library that just provides the easing functions and everything else is basically up to you. it's like animating but you don't touch a single node and guess it all via equations realistically I'm not going to be able to submit this in time. TOO MUCH TO MAKE!!! TOO LITTLE TIME... Sigh! Whatever whatever no if onlys I did what I could! I'll continue and see how far I get edit: maybe not. it's not that important tbh. I'm not feeling up to do it! another time, another time miguel is made of gold sealing him away WHUH??? can't find this person on social media... dunno what I should put for the icon on my sponsors list... obligatory  again MY MONEY   . . . . IT ARRIVED... . . . .!!! thank you fnord, fnord, and fnord that one time in may!! that's a LOT!! I'll start getting them on a monthly basis now assuming I get any lmao on a side note, I originally decided not to do sponsorships because the only payment method I had (PayPal) would reveal my name via Ko-Fi. since GitHub Sponsors uses Stripe, I can just reuse the Stripe account, so I might actually do commissions and potentially earn money outside of donations! Donate:  hi have some trigonometry cattos as a little treat before I disappear into the ether for gmtk game jam 2026 you can imagine my disappointment when the really cool art blog in my dream doesn't actually exist and I don't remember enough about the characters to recreate them so mean!!!! Hi happy two years element critters . Have a diproton thing oh By the way! the punctuation cattos. They're TINY CelLua Machine webcomic, anyone? hi I added all of my cellua cattos to my art fight profile hehehe also here's an apeirocell cat. I broke it apart!!!! watching an art timelapse and the canvas spins around so many times like it's a washing machine so you're telling me "sinh" isn't pronounced /sɪn.h(ə)/? oh yeah here's that miscellanium ref sheet in case you're wondering quite detailed I know :] miguel!!! I'M OFFICIALLY ON ART FIGHT NOW!!! FIGHT MEEEEEEEEEEEE ok while I was getting all the characters uploaded people just started attacking my characters left and right and I got so shocked that my heart went up and my limbs got very numb that was genuinely scary LMAOOOOO ALSO!!!! ALSO!!!! AADENBOY WIKI IS UP!!!! it's in a very barebones state unfortunately BUT you can help contribute to its growth by submitting issues to its GitHub repository!! help me out please!!!! Art Fight: Aadenboy Wiki:  THE FINAL REF SHEETS WHOOOOOH!!! HOLY COW!!!!! ARTFIGHT WILL BE UP TOMORROW... and yes you're reading that right!! WIKI RELEASE!! it will be in a very barebones stage but I'm finally going to release it publicly so this stops being a one-man job! also because art fight but WIKI!!!!!!!!! Hi there was no refs today because my legs were tired and my mind was hazy foggy ... only got one done!! tomorrow Hopefully I can lock in on waking up properly and get the final four done... sauce is surprisingly hard to draw no idea why it was my legs in particular that correlated to me having a hazy brain but they felt very connected. like I couldn't think at all because my legs are so eepy sleepy need stretchy second to last batch of refs for artfight!!! most of my time was spent on Xavier's hehehe... love that guy!! also bringing up Sylvia again just so this isn't another set of only three refs I hadn't said here but the mac mini that was ordered for my birthday arrived yesterday!! there's SO MUCH STORAGE holy CRAP anyways my monitor is very big and I'd rather not have to deal with trying to adjust to drawing with an extremely sensitive drawing pad so in response I simply shrank krita instead only three this time but it works because they're a trio of siblings! I keep mixing up liam and kyle's names lmao MORE!!!!!! here's some fun ones!! cats, but aadenboy's um no that's not what I meant to do ew take that away from her she does not need a neck this is supposed to be for the refs but it was too funny not to do... NOT CANON BY THE WAY. SHE DOES NOT GET TO HAVE THAT NECK five this time!!! getting to the more interesting ones p.s because some of you have been following me on artfight EARLY...... I am not going to add the sheets until I am done with the main cast!! after that then I'll open it and slowly add more characters from there lol sorry no refs this time! cellua consumed me... double next time more refs! more refs! more refs! more refs! reference sheets. and they have the palette roulette I mentioned earlier :) happy second 17th birthday to me yeop all the fireworks are for meeeeee and thus begins the reference sheet speedrun one hour in and I am only 12 minutes through... see you in like three more ❤️❤️ excuse me. what do you MEAN the birthday art gallery video is FOURTY ONE MINUTES LONG. THE LAST ONE WAS ONLY THREE!!!! what, is 283 art pieces paced at around 6–8 seconds a lot or something??? so you know how ref sheets always contain a color palette that you can pick from so the color is correct? all my ref sheets in the future will instead contain large gradients of various "close enough" colors that you get to pick from like a lotto game so that everyone is forced to pick and choose "close enough" just like I do muahahaha happy december 212th, 2025 hi I got the game jam game published!! you should Absolutely play it and enjoy the rushed jank it offers that one youtube livestream emoji people are dealing with a heatwave whilst I'm over here bundling up into long pants and a puffy jacket and turning the heater on because it's the morning and I'm cold!!! why is it COLD!!!!!! wait where did I get the idea that gmtk 2026 starts on july 1st??? no it does not???? it's like a considerable amount of days away???? what?????? hey if you want to see my game dev progress before Half Baked Release you can check out fnord so it turns out that I actually have only three days left to get the game done instead of ten 🥰 time to go dead silent I think as I lock in and I still have to do the gmtk game jam right after waushuahgdfahu weather sokoban titled working with phil where you need to use phil's elongation powers except it's actually a troll game and you must very frequently push stuff off-grid via janky retraction hi if you use glomble please recommend the miscellanium crosspost.... I can never beat the damn recommendation system :sob: posting the recent video in gif form because. this took me forever. you will see miscellanium dance. and watch the video PLEASE art college came some time ago to promote it and like Right Then And There I realized that Yes! I will pursue art!! Definitely!!! Not the technology side!! And the college actually sounded really good and going there was quite nice!! and then it is revealed that yes they will have their students use ai. because It's like the smartphone ya know!!! how you can switch between smartphones and intuitively know what to do!!!! you need to be in line with the current career world and we will have you use ai so you know what to do!!!!!! Oh yeah and the portfolio reviewer also recommended I ask ai to recommend me art software to look into. Honestly horrible taste in my mouth. I planted the tiny little 3d print catsos! as a gratitude! like it's a college I genuinely considered! and then Fucking AI Shows Up! I should probably do some further research and see what else Goes On. maybe it's not ALL that bad. but book covers or something I could always do IT :PPPP I could always go into IT!!!!! you know!!! go to generic college and get IT job!!!! I could do that!!!!!! just because I don't have any other ideas that I could take with the More Expected technical side of my interests. God the future is so strange. what will I do what should I do what can I do. actually how do I plan for it? how exactly do I know that what I have wanted to do or want to do now is something I will truly enjoy? cause the art college like. at least revealed that I think I want to go and pursue art instead of something else. but all of the shit that is going on right now makes such a path hard to fathom, and that being said my other plan is also going to shit with all the stuff that is going on. it doesn't help that I only have like less than a year left before I really have to finalize my choice and hope for the best. I guess with the internet I could always try and go a different path and get support directly for my own passion. I could do commissions! I could do game development! I could ACTUALLY do content creation! ART! ART FUCKING ART!!! but of course I can't depend or expect that. or really anything? hm. I'm just not sure. it's all just so strange those who know So it seems like my understanding of my own art to see the Giant Mistake is entirely local and nobody else can see it . What the helly? do NOT turn the most recent post upside down I repeat do NOT turn it upside down it is NOT meant to be seen that way it is OPTIMIZED for UPRIGHT viewing the two rock critters !! right one is fnord's catso practicing my shading intuition here! the more bouldery critter was fun to shade :D (made with Tecknar:  ) miscellanium that is you ya fool Anonymous asks: "Will you have an artfight account we can attack?" ehh no probably not Maybe. Maybe next year once I have everything sorted out ? ? ? they do this every time they have waffles it is a ritual they all enjoy will probably render this sooner or later drew fnord's Scrounger! you make so many requests but I'm not as confident to ask a request so I'm countering you with my own art instead &amp;gt;:D (made with my art program Tecknar:  ) oh don't mind me just hopping onto an internet forum and profusely sweating and overthinking as I reply to a message sent by a regular there 😁😁  yep all coolHold on this reminds me of a certain one of my characters. liamposting liamposting liamposting decided that he gets to have a regularly colored mouth and funny paw shape because silly (these were made with tecknar:  ) (you can use these if you want btw  ! cc by-sa 4.0) xavier is like sauce except he isn't compulsively self-conscious and actually thrives on being openly strange. and also swedish actually he's better comparable to glass than sauce important pedality notes: • three-legged stools are always tristable. four-legged stools and tables are structurally quadristable, but are most often tristable due to uneven loads • bicycles are monomotile instead of bimotile as the wheels propel motion together • kick scooters are antimotile as they have no way to generate motion. note that steering when in motion is a form of stability. in contrast, motorized scooters are monomotile • cars are monomotile but often quadristable (unlike tables, suspension allows all four wheels to contact) • tanks are bimotile • photons, liquids, and gases are acontextual • teleportation is not a motor hmm maybe I should continue writing my baba is you fanfiction I gave the idea some more thought, and I'm now leaning towards the second option in the poll instead. I think it would help to group force automata and cellular automata in a general "automata" class, where the distinguishing features between each automaton is what exactly its "rules" are. In a cellular automaton, each cell is completely independent from its neighbors and only updates its own state each tick based on the state of the neighborhood around it. The "rule" is how each cell updates itself. Because of this property, the order of which cells are updates does not matter as it simply depends on the initial state of the tick. The locality is that neighborhoods are fixed and non-arbitrary. In a force automaton, each cell is not necessarily independent from its neighbors and can directly influence the state of itself and other cells by propagating forces; the state of its neighborhood is not necessarily relevant to how it updates. The "rule" is how each cell chooses to exert forces and how each force works. Since cells aren't independent of each other, the order of the automaton does matter, and can lead to various types of "biases". The locality is that forces are not able to affect any arbitrary cell, and are instead relative to the cell which exerted it to begin with. This much more lines up with the assumed idea. Cellular automata and force automata are both automata, but the behavior of cells and how rules work separate the two. Separate from the topic of equivalency, I can see a way to model a cellular automaton in terms of forces, but I don't know if there's a way to model a force automaton in terms of neighborhoods (at least with a bounded amount of them). er pinging fnord for a second time.... Anonymous asked: "Has any of your characters driven a car before?" okay for every single character: • George could with modifications, but he would rather not. • Greg could with modifications, but he would rather not. • Doug can drive a car, but I don't know if he has. • Josh could with modifications, but he hasn't tried yet. • Oscar is not allowed to drive a car. • Tim could with modifications, but he would REALLY rather not. • Mark could with modifications, but he hasn't tried yet. • Paul could with modifications, but he hasn't tried yet. • Matthew could with modifications, but he hasn't tried yet. • Dan is under 16. • Linda has driven a car before with modifications. • Kim has driven a car before with modifications. • Phil could with modifications, but he prefers other methods. • Chester has driven a car before with and without modifications. • Marcus has driven a car before without modifications. • THE EVIL FIEND has driven a car before with and without modifications, but she prefers other methods. • Daryl has driven a car before, but would rather be the passenger. • Damian actively drives various types of vehicles. • Anna is monopedal. • Kyle is under 16. • Liam races. • Xavier is forklift certified. • Sauce is unable to drive a car. • Granola is unable to drive a car. • Bismuth can drive a car, but it's an extreme risk. • Jane has driven a car before. • Miguel (the cag) is monopedal, but he's sure as hell tried anyways. • Glass is not allowed to drive a car. • Chalk is not allowed to drive a car. • I have driven a car before. • aadenboy has driven a car before. • yobnedaa has driven a car before. • summer aadenboy has driven a car before. • DelicateGrub82 has driven minecarts and boats before. • aadenboi is a cube. • Present is too small. • AadenboyUtility is a cube. • aaenboy is. idfk man • Magnetite has not attempted driving a car before. • Sulfur-36 actively drives. • Clarine has driven a car before. • Miguel (the bunny) has driven a car before. • Kevin has driven a car before. • Coquí is too small. • Neko is cube-shaped. • Sylvia actively drives. • Miscellanium is uhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhh cheek tufts are funny ... lmao there's just Cones jutting out of your head. What the helly. why are there Spheres attached to you! Why's your head Boat shaped  . you're so Pointy!! so silly give me 10 billion of them I must stick them on all of my designs ermmm tecknar stream perhaps??? and this time the 0 people who wanted to donate actually can without youtube being silly and never giving me the money they took a large cut from anyways sauce with his eyes off (asked by fnord and a Tumblr user) ​fnord's ‪video refuting his model as being a cellular automaton brought to my attention that the view of Cell Machine and its descendants as cellular automata is not as clear-cut as I thought it was. I find this interesting, but I think the reasoning for it isn't correct—or at least too narrow. In the video, one of the points used to analyze it as not a CA is that "information" is able to be passed instantaneously across several cells—that is, the typical "speed of light" (defined by the speed of a normal moving contraption) is broken. Such a feat is impossible in Conway's Game of Life and more importantly violates locality. In the example above, the Mover is able to destroy the Enemy across an arbitrary distance instantly. I personally believe that the simulation is better reframed in terms of "forces" rather than "rules". The "rule" is that the Moving cell moves one space forward every tick, but the underlying "force" is that it pushes itself, and that checks the cell in front to determine if the force propagates or not. This is still local, as the force is only dependent on the current cell and its immediate neighbor rather than the entire structure, even if on the surface it looks global. This gets a little muddy in CelLua Machine's case with cells like the Adjustable Slope and Portal, but works as a perfect interpretation of Cell Machine and wetboatguy's CA. I like to call these kinds of CA's "force automata". I could go as far as to say that traditional CAs are subsets of FAs, but that's much more speculative. Of course, I don't know the full picture. I don't actually study automata theory and I'm personally biased. So, I'll run a poll to see everyone's opinions. Are Cell Machine and its descendants cellular automata? P.S. This post is crossposted from Tumblr. The GIFs used there as examples can't be used here, so I'm linking to it instead. realizing that oscar would actually be EXTREMELY heavy since he's very similar to water. like holy cow man!! 350 kg*?!?! * based on the extremely rough approximation of assuming he's a 4 foot tall by 2 foot diameter cylinder in volume as expected ya fool "Congrats, your channel is 6 today!" "Joined Aug 31, 2019" yeah sure uh huh it seems like youtube really likes miscellanium tonguing the keyboard. good to know... good to knows...... ew man. gross. don't say it like that what the helly is this guy doing melamine and melamine resin (melamine formaldehyde) because Whoa!!! right critter's hat is based off of I1 Temporary Bliss State's formaldehyde design trying out more Dynamic poses here than my usual 0.5 poses # afterthought Showing Sauce in greater detail. You can view this comic as full quality in addition to a brighter version, a text description, and an explanation, here: Like what I make? Donate!  Damn it Granola why is your handwriting naturally italic . what, is the material which makes up your body stiffer and that makes it harder to produce certain limb movements? So unnecessary! "you can make money pursuing art and an interest" Ok well I'm sorry the smart tech nerd guy chose to be an artist instead of a programmer or technician ❌❌❌❌❌❌ drawing sauce's eyes and they're small pupils and . I go thinking. "lol it's like the umm. the uh. the cue ball aim picker from the 8-ball mobile game" And I'm Right Just So You Know tl;dr: sauce is neurodivergent Lmao. Erm so are other characters actually, like meeeee damn it why are all of the scenarios I've thought up featuring sauce Depressing :(((( why must lore be so Negative!!!!!!! Oh yeah I want people to know him for who he really is instead of as a stupid little critter. that's why edit: clarifying that "stupid little critter" is like a really broad sense of what I mean. it's understandable to see someone like him as, I guess, more naive for example than he really is, and I want to show that he isn't Whoops I shared too many posts in a row without original content. Time to watch youtube not show my original content to those who want to see my posts ❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️ happy december 183rd, 2025 hmm throws my fan art at fnord (p.s usually I crosspost these to tumblr but idk if I should tag your blog or link to your youtube instead—I don't wanna interrupt what's going on...!) made with  Oh yeah sorry for spreading misinformation turns out it was a system setting . Hahahaha oh hey did you know that pinching with four fingers can open the launchpad that's pretty coolio Ooooh I can make clicks register from tapping instead of physically clicking??? why isn't this on by default? Oh wow Hey there's also the so google chrome has this feature where if you scroll left with the trackpad past the left boundary of the page you can undo the page. you'll never guess what I just Fucking did while trying to make a drawing in tecknar 😁😁😁😁😁😁😁😁😁😁😁 Day 8: the Puller (#14). The titular cell of CelLua Machine, it moves itself forward with a pulling force every tick, dragging along the cells behind it. It can't push like the Mover. I think a similar design for all of the cells that self-move would make sense. Generally round like their cell. This one's tail is longer though because I think it would grab onto the cell behind with it in order to pull. I'm not sure what the back of the Puller would look like in 3D, though leaks suggest it might be a hollow square or diamond. lol google forgot to update the logo for Google Drawings so it gets to keep its traditional logo :D though the tab icon has changed to the pre-redesign Google Drive logo for some reason... wonder what they're doing trying my hardest not to complain "THE D IS FLAPPED YOU PRONOUNCE THE D AS A FLAPPED R THE R IS RIGHT THERE" in response to someone complaining to someone else "where's the r???" as the other person rolls an r in [wʌrːːaɪɾu] fnord says: "I kept wondering on how monopedal cattos could swim. This is what I came up with. It isn't too serious but sometimes whimsical ideas are better." propellers!! propeller tails!! I wonder if it was spun fast enough if it would work... I think swimming like a fish would work, p sure armless swimmers already do that well this mahjong thing is getting ridiculous! I'm expecting a set on saturday :D Anonymous asks: do any of your ocs have beam attacks? the one and only damn it siivagunner how dare you make me interested in playing mahjong. now I'm spending my free time playing it Day 7: the Enemy (#13). These critters are what you are tasked to rid of when solving a puzzle. When a cell moves into it, it and the opposing cell are damaged 1 HP, of which Enemies and most cells only have one of. If you could touch one without damaging either of you, I think they would actually be very soft. Sort of like a spore. It would make sense given how Enemies explode on contact. Sorry I haven't been doing these, well, daily. I very often jump between random interests. Maybe I should take my thought up on having these be bidaily or something. Then I can post some other CelLua miscellany every other day. out of context wip comic hahaha live reenactment of evil fnord gamne killing my laptop a whole Two (2) times (game in question is  btw go play it) (for some context I was running it through wine since I use a mac and it was not behaving very stably) Anonymous asked: oscar phase diagram when? (/joking but do it if you wanna) please keep him at room temperature or with an ac please thank you no longer agonizingly sick :D wellness speedrun hahaha little late to this but fnord donated 10 :D thank youou!!!!! sick :[ I must say, the dreams I've been having have been the most vivid I've ever seen doesn't help that I still woke up at 5:30 am thank you fnord for the $16 !!!! added a drawing of his pfp to my readme (despite saying there are no benefits hehe) I won't be able to receive the money (or any other) until my probation period ends in 60 days now that I've been sponsored... but I'm still very thankful!!!! someguyiguess asks: how long can sauce get a bit long (he can be stretched long, not make himself long at will) hello hello!!!! I finally got the chessboard printed!! now the chess cats and the two other 3d cats are available for you to 3d print!!! all are available on Thingiverse and MakerWorld on another note, I also set up donations through GitHub Sponsors if you like my work! (moreso stuff like Tecknar, but this counts too) there is a bug with youtube comments where starting a reply to someone, then repeatedly exiting it and clicking "Keep writing" shifts the portion of your message which serves as the mention two characters to the right. if you do this enough times, it will fully travel out of range of the comment and crash youtube Day 7: the Trash cell. This critter doesn't do anything on its own, but will "eat" (trash) any cell which moves into it, permanently removing it. I think these kinds of cells would be real gluttons, partly because trashing is commonly called "eating". fnord sent in some art of a possible design for the Trash cell. The full message is: "man my art is kinda trash... (badum tss) anyways the triangles on the lower half are based on both tiger stripes and the divots in the original cell there are also triangle cutouts in the top half (ears, tail, hair tuft, side tufts) also it has spiky teeth and is very destructive i genuinely just made a mix of a tiger and the evil fiend also the trash icon is on the side because i forgot to make space for it on the front i wanted to draw a mover cat but i couldnt be bothered to tbh speaking of which, mover is distressed because it will be reduced to oblivion in like 2 ticks" I really like this design! They look much more vicious than mine, haha. I haven't considered giving them markings beyond the shading and engraving. Day 6: the 180 Rotator. It rotates the cells around it 180 degrees adjacent to it one axis every tick. Curly guy. Bit short here. Don't got time to write, sorry! fnord asks: "do injuries count for decreasing the pedalism also does guy on the right even count as monopedal? i'd say he's nullipedal also do not ask me to draw crutches ever again i made them too short" in the traditional pedalism system used by everyone on earth, these would appropriately be named "monopedal" and "no legged" [On the left is the same cat with crutches, actively walking. The two arms holding the crutches are labeled "both moving together" and "both stabilize independently", while the one leg is said to "move and stabilize independently". It is overall "bimotile tristable". On the right is the same limbless cat. The base of its body is highlighted, and it is said to be "antimotile monostable upright". Below, it is seen moving across the floor like a worm, and is labeled "monoped lying down".] however, under my pedality system, what determines the pedality of a creature is based upon the parts of it which can drive motion/force (the motors) and retain the current context (the anchors) the left example would be bimotile tristable. the arms (not the crutches) work together and in unison to complete a single force, so they are a single motor, however cannot stabilize alone, making them two distinct anchors. the leg is its own motor and anchor. together, this gives them two motors and three anchors. a good comparison would be assuming the crutches are actually raised platforms. for the creature to truly be a monoped (monomotile monostable), they would need to rely on their leg alone without crutches the right example would be considered antimotile monostable, as there are no motors, but there is an anchor (the base of the body). however, this is only in the context of them being upright. lying on the floor, they can squirm around and such and move their body that way, allowing them to be completely monopedal as the body acts as both a motor and an anchor fnord youtube really does not want me to reply saying that the drawing you sent in didn't send correctly because I made a mistake do you have the code for/an image of it? hej! I went ahead and fixed a Crap Ton of stuff that was lingering around in Tecknar! hotkeys should no longer interfere with typing, MOBILE SUPPORT, and there's now a proper implementation for .tka and .json files (oh I added .json files—you can always import/export those in case I muck up the encoding)  (also  ) WOW!!! tecknar!!! verison uhh. indev. or something. WOW!!!! it's obviously got all the bells and whistles from the inbox version but there's some new features as well which you might find fun! like YOU CAN CHANGE THE CANVAS SIZE. also other miscellaneous crap like groups and stuff and I Actually Implemented Keyboard Shortcuts This Time GO CHECK IT OUT!!! and PLEASE find my bugs...... github: demo: inbox:  fnord I can't seem to comment this on your posts so I'm doing it this way: consider using something like github pages or newgrounds! you can upload images and such in any lossless format you like and structure it however you choose (of course, you need to do all the work, but full freedom) additionally, you can view youtube posts in their full, uncropped quality by replacing everything after "=s..." with "=s0" this is how I set up my youtube posts archive! fnord asks: can i make sauce into laffy taffy this but sauce coloured fnord: so there's a gif from like at least a year ago of phil in a taffy roller and that's eventually turned into oscar and phil having a floor-mounted one in their home just for leisure (much like oscar's blender) I was very busy today so here's a quick comic to compensate. Day 5: the CW (#9) and CCW (#10) Rotators. I've decided to kill two birds(?) with one stone here by taking advantage of the fact that rotation can simply be flipped by rotating 180 degrees in 3D. From one side it's clockwise, and from the other it's counterclockwise. Anyways, both Rotators rotate the cells adjacent to it 90 degrees in their indicated direction every tick. This took a little longer because of the color swap here. At least I don't have to draw two different cats! Since the textures at the bottom left are for 2D CelLua instead of 3D, they are two different cats. The actual texture in-game has a slight gradient, but that would be a pain in the ass to try and replicate. fnord sent me an inbox message containing the two independently and I was flattered! He beat me to the chase as well... Day 4: the Pushable (#4), Slider (#5), One-Directional (#6), Two-Directional (#7), and Three-Directional (#8). The Pushable is a basic cell—it does nothing. The rest of its siblings are variants of it which can only move in the directions indicated. The names here aren't exactly accurate because this is 3D, so these are Pushable-like siblings which have the corresponding symbol on their right side.  You can interpret each face as the directions it can move on that plane specifically. I like them being all squareish. If it isn't obvious (which it probably isn't), the cheek tufts also point in the directions they can move on the front-back above-below axis. The One-Directional at the top there is worried because it can only move one way, and that's up. This is partially perspective practice. Also some more shading practice. I think I'm getting a handle on the shading now! It took a good while, though, because there's five cats this time. just a little bit overpowered still trying my hand at animation... I think this one is ok! Day 3: the Generator (#3). This cell takes the cell that's behind it and creates a clone of it, pushing whatever's in front of it to make space. Unlike the Mover, it doesn't have bias, and certain cells can't be generated by it. I think I'm understanding the shading a little more. This guy has more overlapping pieces and sharp corners so I had to get a little creative, especially with the tiny pixel art form. I imagine that it would clone the cell by poking it with the tip of its tail, and it would shoot out through the diamond at the front. That or it spits the clone out. Both options seem probable. Anonymous asks: not to sound rude or anything but when will you do more inbox responses? why was there only 2? are there too many responses but not enough time for you to respond to them or what? this is unfortunately less of a time issue and more of an organizational issue, or at least a conflict with how I want to structure the responses I have been reading all of the responses and I've been responding to them as I can (extremely infrequent), but the vast majority of them fall into ones that I can only respond to textually (sometimes not even with more than just a word), and the structure I want for both the Tumblr and YouTube posts makes this hard to really do (really I just don't want to make a thousand text responses as images). and then of course there's the time factor. so the backlog has been piling up heavily a majority of the "responded elsewhere" here is from that one stream I did and all count as either uncatalogued or unresponded. optimally they would be "elsewhere and web" the solution I've decided for this was to make a separate webpage to collect all of my responses to, and all of the messages that I have already responded to are currently in this page. I should be able to work through the majority of the inbox messages and with summer approaching I will have more time to spend on it of course I'm also a procrastinator and my priorities are out of whack :') so maybe next decade sauce has serious beef with THE EVIL FIEND and it isn't in a silly joke way. she's genuinely a horrible person. Day 2: the Mover (#2). This guy moves forward one cell every tick by exerting a pushing force onto itself, allowing it to push cells in front of it. It also exerts one unit of bias. It's a little hard to be satisfied with the shading here as the Mover is very shiny. It would be easier to make smoother if the color palette was larger, but that's just something I'll need to get used to (and I don't really want to spend all of my time shading each part...). I'm not sure what the cells are made of, but I've been assuming a sort of plastic-like material. The tail's shading would suggest rubber though (as in a balloon). The engravings seen here would be on all sides of the cat, so you would see an arrow from above and below as well. I might need to do this bidaily (despite the blog (fnord)'s name) so that I can work on other projects as well, but I think I will speed up over time. Making this one was significantly shorter than the previous one. (by the time this is posted it'll be midnight. this way it shouldn't clog up my regular posts) excuse me ??? where's the two nickels I'm supposed to have for the times that my teacher has complained to the same group of students about whether Cars 2 is canon or not ??? hmm ??? this is a SCAM !!! rough height chart (context in the pinned comment) Day 1: the Wall. This cell cannot be affected by any cells, but can still be  generated. These first few cells you'll see will define the design characteristics I'm going with for all of the cells, and for immobile cells like the Wall, I imagine them having dense droopy fur with hard angles, similar to the shape (other cells tend to be rounder). I've omitted the bolts in the corners, though. I had to redo the shading twice here as I wasn't fully confident with it. I'm not sure what magic KyYay put into his art but MAN is he a good pixel artist. (for those who follow my Tumblr blog, this is hosted over at fnord instead of my main blog, but I'll self-rb there as well!) am I going insane I'll make a proper render later .., ,, ... zzzzzzzzz shout out to using old software! sure I'm at a huge security risk and everything is very slowly dropping support for me. BUUUUUUT all of the same applications are physically incapable of thrusting me with all of the weird features they're adding for their shareholders like AI. so surely that's a plus! also 32-bit software I've started reading a certain book (creatures by fnord on tumblr) I've started work on splitting the drawing thing in the inbox into a standalone art program so that it can mature and Hopefully (this is the plan) be used elsewhere too will be calling it "tecknar" because swedish language :P what should I add to it... bigger canvas sizes and better optimization in both ways are my current focus some more sauce and co. lore (transcription in the pinned comment; individual posts included after first image) Amazing stream everyone. next one in 2038 ❤️ sauce and his siblings can probably only type using swipe to type due to lacking digits, though I wonder if there is a way to generalize it to be able to type any set of symbols Hmm might do a stream. may be doable today! will try restarting my laptop prior so that hopefully I can actually use my drawing tablet without it being sluggish. if not I can try falling back to music making...... unless that also lags because it's google chrome Hmm might do a stream. may be doable today! will try restarting my laptop prior so that hopefully I can actually use my drawing tablet without it being sluggish. if not I can try falling back to music making...... unless that also lags because it's google chrome trying something new here more experimenting and loreing. I will def be making a tumblr blog for these cattos once I've got the languages made :P I need to stop mucking about and start figuring out how to take commissions!! I need MONEY....... must figure out who is Interested....... color space...!!!! the cattos....... testing out the vector art style I will use for them happy december 153rd, 2025 featuring a poll with FIVE options me when tetraplas... it is the most reactive allotrope, with higher allotropes having less severity. therefore LONG oh boy this color catto world building project is going so swell!! so fun!! hey what do you mean I'm supposed to make a conlang that gets split into two separate languages which then remerges into a pidgin but never creolizes which then itself becomes a pidgin with a PIE descendant and it also never creolizes hi you can name layers now fnord hey guys I might've lost the plot and gave the art pad a few more features. but most of the drawings I've tested have compressed almost 50% so Hell Yeah! thanks to fnord for the suggestion for more tools btw for the one or two who poked into my code and generated crap: I've thrown together a quick documentation at the bottom of the help section if you want to try out all the fun features in v3! but if you don't, all of the old codes will still work perfectly fine (and are automatically converted to v3 if you import them :D) LIGHT CATS LIGHT CATS might not be their final design I am Very unsure about their tail. also unsure with the group name but I'm sticking with the proto-germanic names. THE LORE IS BREWING..... subtractive colors shall be next... maybe even other color spaces if I'm feeling spicy &amp;gt;:D oooh it might be fun to start a tumblr blog for this once I've got it all settled down... start ROLEPLAYING even... oh um fnord hi the cattos the infoboxes on the wiki will have a special section with color swatches where it picks a random color that will look "close enough" to what general idea of color the character uses. this is because I don't care to be consistent with it and therefore you shan't either punctuation elements....... whoa......... (transcription in the pinned comment) hey do you ever forget the scope of your own art program and start adding more tools and better compression and layers and blending modes and opacity and watch me turn yet another intangible concept into a monopedal anthropomorphic cat with high amounts of physical lore and properties and cohesion because I can (transcription in the pinned comment) ​fnord sent in a message to my inbox with a drawing of Neko and I realized I haven't properly shown it in full (because I hadn't decided on its full body yet), so ref sheet time! and extra doodle of it sleeping because it is so box shaped :P at the request of fnord, I have created a catalog of all of my community posts here on YouTube since apparently all posts after the 200th most recent one aren't accessible. which sucks! cause there's some pretty interesting history here! you should take a gander if you want to be familiar with all of the aadenboy youtube lore...... shout out to youtube's balls moderation system for deleting all of my comments and replies for no reason, requiring me to use my alt just to speak sulfur-36 :P the fact that geometry dash objects can be colored with either of the icon colors and several pre-2.0 objects defaulted to this is crazy to me. so much talk about "every copy of n64 is personalized". geometry dash literally does this and nobody ever mentions it and I get slapped in the face witnessing someone else play a level like deadlocked since the ENTIRE color palette is different. what do you MEAN the level isn't green and red?!?! you're telling me electrodynamix's pulses are your player colors???? even dash does it but it's subtle since it's only a few objects which defaulted to it do you ever get mesmerized by the effects of parallax like whoooooa the pattern on the shower curtain looks so cool up close... moving my head around and focusing and unfocusing and watching the shape do its thing like whooooa xavier has the amazing ability of being able to stay perfectly still for an extended amount of time whoops leaned too far into xavier liking rocks and now he's canonically a rock mixture himself nekoposting you'll never guess who I've suddenly been absolutely obsessing over and expanding the lore of hey guess what xavier has a long tongue for grabbing rocks and licking salt because he's silly like that. just like sauce and saint rain world except not actually infinite (smh what a loser /j) also don't be fooled it's very coarse and rough. like a rock. which he loves eating. if you forgot...... gosh I wish I could make the inbox responses website sooner but my entire weekend and week are absolutely BOOKED... I hate collecting them and being unable to respond :( the term is now officially polypedal! on tumblr the votes between multipedal and polypedal were pretty close (though off by a margin of 13%), and neither quantipedal nor pluripedal passed 10% "hey what if this didn't happen/happened a different way" Um guess what I don't care and don't want to know. I am glad that it happened because it allowed the sequence of events which led me to where I am right now and for life to be different even by the tiniest amount would ricochet and seed the randomness towards a completely different path that would scare my current self. the thought of the alternate scares me in this kind of scale and I'm so glad I don't have to replay my life WHY IS IT SNOWING. IT'S APRIL. IT'S BEEN SPRING FOR A MONTH. ok important pedalism update which one should replace ambipedality if you have better ideas by all means throw them at me well now I need to redefine ambi- as well &amp;gt;:/ slowly indoctrinating everyone into my system of pedalism so that dictionaries will redefine ambipedalism to refer to supporting multiple pedalities in a single context rather than being about using both feet equally well (← bipedal bias) decided to try my hand at fnord's (Tumblr) CESSBM chart (transcription in the pinned comment) hey do you ever decide that the best solution to your problems is to make your own voice synthesis software I had to take this gif through hell and back to get it to 6.1 mb so if you want regular quality check out either of these two answering a message sent to my inbox from fnord with a significant amount of lore (transcription in the pinned comment) doodles (transcription in the pinned comment; I'm attempting including them for art w/o text as well) had to redesign Neko's body because 戻る does not mean "side" and also does not mean "back" as in the body part next character in The Lore! it's me. it's me! Hahaha! Hehehehehahaha. first of all the aadenboys. technically this is my Persona and thus has my idealized hair style rather than my Actual Form but whatever. Hahahehaha. (transcription in the pinned comment) fnord every room that's been depicted before is an "artwork" with its own lore and details. their creation is governed by the initial piece which defined the scene itself, but any additional lore is up to the artist and is only "photographed" by the artwork after the fact "im so glad the hub is full of art like this :3" author's note: "the hub" is a common generic title for the entire lore they're in miscellanium being Terrible once more. because the creature just can (transcription in the pinned comment HOPEFULLY) man if only there were measuring cups for basic things like cereal with milk. they already do this with the little tiny boxes of cereal and the tiny cartons of milk! just give me that as a measuring cup so I don't put too much Ingredient next time I try pouring out a "reasonable" amount! shout out to birds for being tripedally aerial help hey remember when I complained about half of my subscribers being from wavetapper the x and check mark emojis are so peak ❌❌❌ Nooo That's so wrong ❌❌❌ Shut your yapper !!! ❌❌❌❌ ✅✅✅ Yes you are So Real for that ✅✅✅ Speak your truth !!! ✅✅✅✅ he LOVES coal... absolute banger of a rock (transcription in pinned comment) fnord (can't mention wpawntoe4 for some reason) hey if you want to see me absolutely butcher my own conlang..... (the purple alien critter one) me when I find out that it is actually a near-close near-front unrounded vowel and not a voiced palatal approximant mystic vaults when literally any cellua cell yeah just like that (transcription in the pinned comment) they have good chemistry together I think also congrats to fnord for managing to predict this comic lmao take my subscriber count with a grain of salt currently standing, 860 of them are from the wavetapper video not to mention yobnedaa cellua machine 3.0 is my silksong 😋 the different art style on that first image is in fact for lore reasons MY INBOX HAS FILLED!! here's what people sent me! (transcriptions in the pinned comment) (psst if you're swedish please check my sentences here... I used wiktionary!) thank you everyone!! :D happy burgundy fnord  enjoy the crossposting hehehehehe I'll get to the other responses you all sent me soon but I want to highlight this one in particular because HyperAnd over on wikimedia wanted me to draw sum for wiktionary. and now xavier is on wikimedia commons!!! how cool is that?!?!?! he's the example for a wiktionary entry!! that is so cool!! digital footprint is gonna go whack since I determine neither I nor xavier as Furry but like the idea of him being such a symbol is funny regardless :P also taking the opportunity here to say that most of my art is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0, so use as you wish :D you should be able to draw on my inbox on mobile now! I like octaplou a bit hehe (transcription in the pinned comment) moral of the story is bring one next time ya doofus hey! I set up the inbox!! it's just a wrapper over google forms so it's very lightweight. good choice in my opinion. go pester me! (but don't overdo the drawings please) fnord tagging you since you seemed interested I'm not sure what affiliation a generic aadenboy cat and a taxonomically accurate cat have to do with an insidious nation riddled of fires incredulous laws and citrus, but I trust that your calculations are correct (backwards backronym based on my narrow knowledge of ca by the way) ewww what is this thing. octaplou???? SO weird!!! so ESOTERIC..... Get it out of my sight IMMEDIATELY!!!!!!!!!!!! considering the proper name. would use octaploo but I don't know how I feel about that double o....... so octaplou.... youtube (transcription pinned) fun fact: chester is decidedly omnilingual because of this post by fnord http://youtube.com/post/Ugkx2f26ezPT2F5U8vEM1qFOXZLAQN48jodx?si=36-829Q-pJxnNjTB to end things off, here are Glass and Chalk, the final two cags in The Lore thus far! they're both siblings of Sauce and as such are colored infrared and ultraviolet respectively, with Glass being malleable much like clay and Chalk being extremely elastic much like a rubber ball. haven't fully defined them yet but I imagine Glass is destructively silly. like. she'd use a bazooka for the funs of it. and Chalk is. like. a guy. I guess?? like Miguel?? but different... zzzzzzzzz Jane and Miguel are the next pair of siblings in The Lore. big sister/little brother combo! Jane is often content and at ease with most but can easily become contested. her limbs float Rayman-style (this also applies to her head but she'll often Not do that as that's tiring). Miguel is... Miguel! his eyes are offset forwards from his face (appearing to be at the side from other angles). he's quite a person indeed roleplaying being a normal person on the internet so accurately some might call it sockpuppetry &amp;gt;:) every time someone reblogs my art as ♯furry I go Hah! Lol! That ain't me! I mean such a community would enjoy my art and I see the connection made here especially if viewed in the broad (and incorreft) sense but pedantically and preferentially speaking that's not me nor my characters! Hehe! Shrug! it's everyone's favorite siblings!! Sauce, Granola, and Bismuth! they're all similarly malleable rubbery (immortal) cags, though Bismuth leans more into malleability while Granola settles more into elasticity (Sauce is both properties). per each cag: Sauce is highly sociable and friendly with a penchant for usability and overall helpfulness, but also focuses a little too hard on keeping everyone at ease with him; Granola is less caring and more monotone—often inquisitive or challenging—with a distinct attitude; Bismuth is logical and wise, easily able to deflate conflicts and disagreements (great help on Sauce's part) but can be a bit hard to talk to himself TUMBLR REVERTED THE CHANGE 🎉🎉🎉🎉🎉🎉🎉🎉🎉 considering opening up a carrd or google forms to get people to send me more of their thoughts :PP oh whoops tumblr is killing itself 🥰🥰🥰🥰🥰🥰🥰🥰🥰🥰 woohoo 🥰🥰🥰🥰 if you like taurs or long critters in general you will absolute enjoy Xavier, the next cag in The Lore. he's able to shapeshift between having more or less arms and legs because he's Silly like that (even more so when excited)! he's also swedish and therefore works/lives at IKEA and a reliable interior designer! he's a rather simple person tbh. you'll get along with him easily also. he can eat rocks because I think they would be tasty... 🤤🤤 the next batch of siblings in The Lore: Anna, Kyle, and Liam. Anna and Liam so far aren't really that defined but I imagine Anna would definitively be the kind of silly-annoying type present on the interwebs and Liam is undoubtedly a warriorskitty (the Tumblr blog). Kyle is actually defined as of current!! he is a Big sports person of Any sports. and also an actor Jim Carrey style. hell, maybe even a comedian????? Shrug...... how silly!! they're all so silly!! Damian, the next bipedal cag in The Lore. if there were a main character it would probably be him (or George!) since he's quite interested in piecing together the lore of The Lore, and is an unofficial mascot of the aadenboy wiki because of this. on the topic of meta: he helps pass the word around about what you guys and I post about them and The Lore (not everyone necessarily can nor wants to carry a phone (SHOCKER)). outside of all that he's a self-employed carpenter but can reliably work in any trade job hi ranted about wiki banners over on tumblr. not gonna post it in full here because SNOOOOORE. but it is a heartfelt topic! accessibility is a must! Daryl, the first bipedal cag in The Lore (excluding Chester, that guy got it later). really cool guy! easy to talk to as well! surfer at heart and will engage in most activities as well. his eyes are very sensitive to light, causing everything to appear extremely saturated and bleached (think of night vision but turned up WAY high), so the sunglasses are in fact a disability aid oh extra lore since this is important: he exists on YouTube as fnord since he was originally a bot for my livestreams (delegating this role to AadenboyUtility instead so he can Have A Life ya know)... go poke at him!! it would be funny!!! Marcus and THE EVIL FIEND, partners in crime in The Lore. you all know and love the fiend—she's exactly what it says on the tin and does not give a crap about her age nor her size, hence her atrocities. lesser known Marcus semifrequently assists/guides her towards such path and is overall a big ol' menace himself. also he's perpetually shaded you MUST shade him even if your art style does not call for it you MUST!!! irc chat is pretty cool! would recommend trying it out oh how come I only NOW find out that my macbook has been using a color space different from sRGB??? everything is so SATURATED now that it's fixed it's so WEIRD!!!! erm update while typing this: turns out it also turned off the blue light filter when I did that so. lmao. Got my eyes blasted by daylight Hahaha. brief interlude in loredumping to show off this element catto—Magnetite! tl;dr quite friendly guy! good pathfinder and can protect the iron compounds! something something go read his wiki article lmao I ain't reexplaining crap I think it's funny how people still default to they/them or referring to me neutrally despite my username being the most obvious and present indicator on who and what I am someone had to cite my youtube channel just for the pronouns section of an infobox!! so silly!! (fooling around there's probably something I don't know Hahaha) Chester, the next ambipedal cag in The Lore and the partner of Linda. unlike most of the cags in the lore, he has a got damn SNOUT!!! what the helly!! he quite enjoys music (chiefly alternative rock like WEEZER). he recently is also able to change between quadrupedalism and bipedalism thanks to a previous drawing Linda drew of him ah yes. nothing like my dream using the metaphor "trying to speak while only knowing the moisture" to describe an indigenous tribe's system of using body paint (likely tattoos) which encode a numerical system identifying each tribe member individually, of which the order of said glyphs also roughly draw out a pictograph of a present Phil, another cag in The Lore. he's able to control both halves of his body independently and his torso extrudes (creates new material—does not stretch elastically) to compensate. he's also able to control the tension. pretty nifty trick! good friends with Oscar, too this ref sheet details his ability more clearly omniphobic (transcription of reblog thread in pinned comment) Kim, the third of three cags designed for The Lore, and the big brother of Dan. he is a great chef, and his omniphobic fur also means he cannot get dirty (great for his hobby)! however, as a representation of my own (self-diagnosed...) OCD, witnessing or sometimes even thinking of improper kitchen conduct manifests as that, plus painful electrical surges to better convey it (this is shown in the comic instability) "oh boy! a new google doodle! I sure hope it isn't another ai promotion!" Linda works fast food by the way. just gonna point that out. it's not like she has to but it was conceptualized for a short I never even started and it stuck lmao Linda, the second of three cags designed for The Lore, and Chester's partner. no special abilities, but she draws! that's pretty cool! she was also unnamed for some time but that was a long time ago on a now defunct forum, and has (a very short) lore regarding those whiskers y'know I'm not at all a shipper guy. I don't do The Romance! yet I can look at two of my characters who have Rarely interacted and go "Yep these two are perfect for each other. Why? No idea!! Just take my word for it" Dan, the first of three cags designed at the same time for The Lore, and the start of the more visually and or conceptually creative cags! he's the little brother of Kim and can often be seen surfing with Daryl whoops accidentally gave my program an incredible amount of data it SHOULDN'T have! time to watch my laptop crash as the now giddy tokenizer parses every single character 😍😍😍🤑🤑🤑 okay this is getting increasingly esoteric! here's Matthew, also part of The Lore. downscaled and bitcrushed and crap. he does not like me nor any of my counterparts and you can probably guess why Paul, the second mute character in The Lore. despite his looks he is NOT ominous nor has any evil intentions (THE EVIL FIEND already fulfills that role). as I've decided right now his fog is inverted from the color of the background Mark, one of two mute* characters in The Lore. his body is portrayed with a lack of defined edges (though he would still be colored in normally, unlike Josh), instead relying on implying his shape. since he's mute, he invented his own sign language to compensate, and his speech bubble will automatically translate it to English I would've used a transparent background to show his infill but it didn't look good Tim, the sixth member of The Lore. there's unfortunately nothing too interesting about him (as of right now, he's had very little described interactions) and he's currently in the middle of a personality shift (essentially his true personality coming to fruition over time as I understand him more) partly since he's had so little interactions, so anything I say here might be outdated or irrelevant. oh well! there's your lore dump for the day! Oscar, the first ambiped in The Lore (and the first with a Significant Gimmick). his liquid body allows him to swap between being quadruped and monoped! (shown in gif) happy december 91st 2025 wtfdym it's march already??????? I thought there was another week!! Josh, the fourth member of The Lore. the backgrounds are there for an important reason! George and Greg, the first two in The Lore {{DISPLAYTITLE:post}} so glad my special interest is wikis. I love contributing to such encyclopedias [[File:Thumbsup.svg|20px|alt=Thumbs up icon]] marrying mediawiki, even. Ya know. {{Humor}} if ya get me Haha. Go ~~~~ on [[User talk:Aadenboy|my talk page]] even Lmao [[Category:Aadenmisc]] fun in wondering how others perceive my characters... what would others imagine about them? do others have headcanons about my lore?? Must learn!!! Must know!!! characters also progress With a page: George, Greg, Doug, Josh, Oscar, Tim, Mark, Paul, Matthew, Dan, Linda, Kim, Phil, Chester, Marcus, THE EVIL FIEND, Daryl, Damian, Anna, Kyle, Liam, Xavier, Sauce, and Aaden Without a page: Granola, Bismuth, Jane, Miguel, Glass, Chalk, aadenboy, yobnedaa, summer aadenboy, DelicateGrub82, aadenboi, Present, Clarine, Miguel, Kevin, Cone cat, Coquí, Neko, Sylvia, Magnetite, and Miscellanium so much sass... "[Music] Heat. Heat. [Applause] Foreign. Heat. Foreign. [Music] [Music]" putting these little craps everywhere in my school. everyone will know it was me. it will be hilarious hey can you help me out here and describe my art style for me!! like what do you notice and such?? get pedantic por favor Heart emoji edit: no not the ascii art... my Regular art yk what. generic corporate music slaps. helps me focus on laborious tasks and silence my brain (presumably) okay sure it's one thing to take a look at your old art and see how weird the art style looks but it's another thing to see what the original idea for the lore was wtfdym there was a place called the "intermediate path crossing point for art and media"? what do you mean the fourth wall was a tangible thing? IT WAS A LAW TO CONFORM TO THE ART STYLE?? fnord perhaps (lore) if you happen to follow my other account you may notice that glass is similar to a previous generic aadenboy cat I've drawn before... the same thing also happened to xavier! I love sharing lore !!!! I love infodumping !!!! I love being prompted questions about what the hell is going on !!!! Waiter, waiter !!!! More asks please !!!! instability finally finished an actual lore comic!! (holy crap??) this is a little more dense than what I've typically done and I'm worried some of what I'm trying to portray here isn't going to be very clear but oh well this is also somewhat representative of my own experiences. just like hyper-exaggerated for lore reasons ​fnord 😂😂😂😂😂😂😂😂😂😂😂😂😂 watch me figure out how to draw hands with FINGERS (SCARY!!!) post-game doodles in order (clockwise starting top left): Kyle, Daryl, Coquí, Damian kyle actually hasn't been drawn in forever so I had the fun opportunity to slightly redesign him and give him a unique paw shape muahaha GO SEAHAWKS‼️ dude tumblr is LOVING the quadrupedal ddr post. 240 notes... so weird... silently hoping it gets on those tumblr reading thing channels muahaha esolangs: oh wow!! this is so fun!! it's like a puzzle... trying to figure out how to do an otherwise easy algorithm by getting around the limitations of the language! yippie!! regular programming languages: Genuinely wtf is this. This is the worst code that I have ever written. Horrible in every way imaginable. SOPPING WET code. Unbearable and unmaintainable. Jank as crap. Completely remaking from scratch IMMEDIATELY. any time I try writing a story "shouts" man I need to expand my vocabulary "puzzled" man I need to expand my vocabulary "asks" man I need to expand my vocabulary "looks" man I need to expand my vocabulary "responds" man I need to expand my vocabulary "annoyed" man I need to expand my vocabulary "guesses" man I need to expand my he's 3 stars media literate by the way reminder that your comments are not in isolation &amp;lt;3 mentioned: fnord fnord fnord got the biggest stroke of inspiration I think I've ever had and redesigned sauce's brother granola! props to you if you can figure out what inspired me :P oughhh those legs are hard to draw though... yes.... ponder the lore.... and the sublores.... and the subsublores.... it's not meant to be in there! there's no space for it! this is why he doesn't do this so often... &amp;gt; side view slow motion video of sauce blinking at 30 billion fps (something might interesting…) (thank you damian for filming this!) wiki editor consider the following me when I make a drawing showing the art style of one of my ocs and I start thinking "Hey is this really any different from mine ??" and like lore wise Sure That would make sense But I don't want it to just be. mine with extra steps! maybe my eyes are incredibly biased that's probably what it is happy december 63rd, 2025 Linda's art style the yapper... naxana nahmálaxa nálxanâ hmalyxâlyáxâ! also went back to the previous animations and fixed the left arm outline ermm. what the helly. that is NOT ná my guy. nahmánxa nánàlxanâ hmalyxâlyáxâ! hey this isn't actually so hard! might try this more often xaxâna manàlaxa manàxánâxa mnalyâxâ xâ???? manàhmlyânâ mnalyáxâ xalaxa... the animation is Ok I guess. could be BETTER but I do NOT have the time for that right now. not that bad for my first try at this program though at one point I had a laptop which was so unfathomably slow that it would take at least 10 or more seconds for what I typed to appear and it forced me to anticipate and correct any typos I made before it would even show since it was unbearable otherwise you know what? sure! youtube gets to hear my personal lore too &amp;gt; reblog of coolcabbagecat on Tumblr: "the temptation to code your own drawing tool like some sort of digital blacksmith is real" in a block coding community I'm (pseudo-actively) a part of called Hopscotch, there are probably several hundreds of art pads that people will use and make and it's a good portion of the community there (at least from the circle I observe). hell there's even a default function ("custom rule") that lets you add a really rudimentary pen and some go all out to implement undoing and stuff (all done with string manipulation cause there's no list prototype) a lot of it is mostly conversations from what I witness—it's remixes on top of remixes with text added alongside a doodle (which, by the way, isn't preserved at all beyond the thumbnail) once you publish. so in a way the art pad is a conversational medium lmao will forever love that place :P (obviously you can do this with anything but this is what my brain links it to. that's some personal lore for ya) (oh also I made an art pad in löve which simulates sand drawing and wood carving specifically for my conlang... might rb and share that later) (also if you're curious it's not like scratch at all—completely different workflow and structure. recommend trying it if you like esolangs LMAO you really gotta get creative trying to use it) I did the game developer thing... in 3d... whoa... go check out The Progress at fnord!!! what if maze survival 3d once again reminded that feral and anthro are more commonly used than quadrupedal and bipedal. bleghhh the semantics of those words are broad!! I see it and go "Well what does that mean???" And Try to get the terms to link up. and it only half connects... but then it contradicts itself!! Bad!!! come up with your own word and THEN I'll understand and like the terminology!!! you did it once you can do it again!!! Shouting into an abyss Hahahaha. This is not that important tbh. just wanting my enjoyed view of pedalism to be broad. though I GUESS the word optimally has it's own distinct semantic space from quadrupedal. but in practice Do you care ? rallying semantic drift edit: correction (going to try and post more and not worry so hard about what others will say. because that plagues me) it is not fun seeing people using the mathematical letter symbols (𝕏𝔜𝒁) as stand-ins for font markup. that is NOT what they are for. they are NOT read like regular text by screen readers. they do NOT query the same in search results. they are NOT consistently supported by all fonts. support in general is VARIED. THEY'RE HARD TO READ TO BEGIN WITH. please use them for their CORRECT purpose oh yeah in general just please don't use "fancy font" characters like that please please please holy piss!! srv3 subs are (possibly) coming back!! either this was really a temporary issue or rallying made them undo the crap but Yahoo  the support page doesn't give much context beyond that and what we already know but It's Something! "We've temporarily limited the serving of YTT/SRV3 uploaded captions files, as they may cause video playback to fail for some viewers." look at the cellua machine wiki's new skin!!! this took me around threeish days to finish... highly worth it though!! me when I see stylization and or toon force and immediately begin to think about how that would work in practice if it were to obey conventional logic because that's fun to do prompt where they ask you to rate if something was good except the x button doesn't dismiss the prompt and actually sends an extremely loud incorrect buzzer to tell them you hate it there is actually no way youtube would even consider removing stylized subtitles. this is genuinely infuriating. thanks sloptube!!!! I sure love creating on your platform!!!! hey look at my cool website design skills whoooa (this took me several hours to implement kjdsgkasdjasfhdj) answering a tumblr ask! big fluffy tails... see pinned comment for the transcript went and finished this christmas art I was previously burnt out on lovers :PP all the cat chess pieces !! complete !! queen and king are in black cause we ran out of white filament yayyy 7 (max 8) wrong btw &amp;lt;3 Almost didn't pass Hahahahahaha. fnord NO sharing this doodle in particular like why portray crying in this way sure stylization but erm??? it's MELTING!!!! also including drooling in this. why would you melt the Lip just show Water god damn it!!! been thinking bout doing commissions..... scary thought since I know Nothing about the process okay base start;; price ?? ?? thinking Maybe 25?? 15–25?? Reasonable?? Scary scary scary... but MONETIZATION...!!! this is what happens when you leave someone unattended with blender and a 3d printer (jk everyone was in on this :P) would also show the king and queen here but those will have to wait since we're out of white filament... my art style translates really well into 3D :D special thanks to one of my friends for suggesting giving the bishop a cloak!! (reposted to replace second image) him and his children erm. why you so big. How ridiculous. Unnecessary!!! ouuughhhh my haaaaands (obviously has never sanded before) the end result wasn't even that great. it's all. sandy. GRAY!! I mean at least it feels smooth posting this one here as well cause I went to ikea today :PP will share images tomorrow...! also fnord go check for next doodles!!! hi going to start doing daily doodles over on fnord (same tag on tumblr as well) to get myself to draw more... go check that out!! happy 2026 from cellua happy december 32nd, 2025 the aadenboy multifandom iceberg (Acres deep) (my influence is Wide) Hmm youtube did I repost too many times for your algorithm. do you not like my content now ? ? Show my art you Coward (Starts furiously checking my analytics in fear that I'm now considered niche solely based on like count despite the multiple comments under the post) here take this filler post while I make the christmas one because my body decided that it was best that I be burnt out the days prior. uhh.h merry christmas these are all me by the way. every single one of them is just me in order: Aaden, aadenboy, yobnedaa, summer aadenboy, Present, DelicateGrub82, aadenboi máxânâ!!!! ref sheet for sauce! the transcription and his wiki page (as of writing this) are both in the pinned comment response to fnord over on tumblr (also might be of interest to fnord) (1) corrected version of the sentences found in the previous images (2) response to "there are two spaces on the top. each space either has a dash, nothing, or the weird one with a tail on the right. theres also two spaces on the bottom with the same properties. what does this indicate?", obviously obfuscated in the same system because It's Funny man why you so mysterious ? ? ? ? ? what are you even....!!!! me when I develop lore just to ask for request on what I should draw him doing/being also ignore the line work I did this on a mouse lmao back in that phase again where I have no idea what I want to do and start doing everything in short bursts in hopes that I'll find what I want to do sauce responds --- MENTIONS: (2) fnord, fnord (3) fnord, fnord (4) fnord, fnord, fnord, fnord (5) fnord, fnord (6) fnord (on Tumblr) sauce's eyes would probably obscure his vision since they're so large and protrude outwards this is my rendition of that man why you so worried. this doesn't even hurt you also slightly out of context, but lore happy december 1st, 2025 recreation of element cattos art that appeared in my dream last night. the worm is slowly eating my brain I have no clue what the elements are (or if these were even their symbols) and I took some Artistic Liberty here with the elements themselves but like this is close enough!! why's it on a city coastline? no idea!!! also the art in the dream wasn't mine so I'm STEALING hahaha. amazing drawing stream despite the fact that my laptop was crying the entire time also thanks to fnord and fnord for the money ? ? ? ?????? you both are crazy for that Thank you but Please save your money for better things 🙏🙏🙏🙏🙏 youtube takes like 30% cut anyways 🙏🙏🙏🙏🙏 my thoughts the actual definitions on the aforementioned article are more generalized than just leg count but that covers it well enough might actually start working on the aadenboy wiki again wrote up an entire article on pedalism (fnord) couldn't help myself from bringing Similar Characters together I think I did the shading right... also thought it would be cool if xavier had a swedish accent. lmao typography youtube was five hours late when telling me I can now access ad revenue sharing... what is this platform coming to... merry early christmas, here is a secret bug oc I never revealed fnord phil ref several halloween costumes might do more...! --- [1L] Jane as Rayman [1R] Miguel as Gold from the Element Cattos blog [2L] Damian as an OSHA inspector [2R] fnord as an IRS special agent [3L] Bismuth [3M] Sauce [3R] Granola [4L] Marcus as Kamek [4R] THE EVIL FIEND as Bowser hey remind me again what time it is me when one of my characters refuses to switch art styles out of fear of misrepresentation and in order to make a reference sheet I also have to make a detailed reference sheet about my own art style so that other artists can portray him correctly. but also he _is_ __slowly__ coming to terms with the idea that This Is a Misguided and potentially Irrational fear. but I mean I ain't gonna force that upon him can't believe minecraft is copying cellua by naming the variants of its mobs synonyms Nudger ← Mover → Puller  Drowned ← Zombie → Husk  Stray ← Skeleton → Parched this is unjust! lawsuit and dmca immediately! also Generator → Maker → Cross Maker → Directional Cross Maker → Physical Directional Cross Maker → Physical Directional Cross Backmaker Copper → Copper Block → Cut Copper → Weathered Cut Copper → Lightly Weathered Cut Copper → Waxed Lightly Weathered Cut Copper → Waxed Lightly Weathered Cut Copper Stairs cellua machine also pinging fnord in hopes that he uses youtube still lmao the new reply system looks so much better it's so organized!! and tidy!! and neat!! actually good youtube update hey what if this channel was actually called the advancer cell and I exclusively posted cellua content and contraptions on a consistent basis only to then have it die after a year that would be funny wouldn't it /ref /alsotumblrref (fnord) mayber we're the same person .. . also go check this out  hell yeah 4,000 contributions on the cellua wiki lovers :&amp;gt; cellular automaton moment p.s. fifth gif has an ant with a speed of 4/3c at the top middle leftish a bit ago my teacher caught a glimpse of my esolangs (specifically Iterate) and after a moment of disbelief said something along the lines of "The government would love for you to work for them. I'm serious!" mind you he teaches cybersecurity inspiration has struck me here's this cat that I drew on MSPaint during e-sports; the other members suggested the party hat coquí the mr friskers he looked at me like this before taking off (fnord) decided to put the element cattos into Sokobond because it's a banger sokoban puzzle that you should play immediately rather than Relationships I thought it would be a fun idea to represent the connections with their hands and they're appropriately multi-handed based on that oh also they use the colors used in the game rather than in The Lore™ for distinction (crosspost from tumblr) THIS ALL TOOK ME LIKE A DAY TO DRAW . GHASDFJKGHADSKFHSDJ. I'M NEVER DOING 3D LIKE THIS EVER AGAIN. oh the joys of being extremely anglocentric and pronouncing "на самом деле я не говорю по-русски" as [ha kʰa.mɑm bʰɛ.nɛ ɹ̩ː hɛ ɹɔˈbɔˌpʰi.ɔ noʊ ˌpʰiˈkːin] happy december 305th, 2024 fan art of fnord because goober I took some artistic liberty here with goober since I couldn't find a good reference, hope it turned out okay !! also pinging fnord I guess (I did Not repost this to fix a minor detail. Nope! no way...) fnord you've commented like 280 times on this channel!! What The Carp?? fnord comes ten above half that (fnord) nominating damian to be a background character for #EspresstoeBeans! did my best here to replicate your art style but I've also included him in mine as a reference edit: realizing that I forgot the arm band thrice?? which somehow is possible?? fnord without his sunglasses + extra doodles of him EXTREMELY IMPORTANT LORE DO NOT FORGET: sauce is edible! he *can* control his flavor but only between abstract concepts of flavor like sweet and sour RELEVANT EDIT: immortal enjoy even more 3d cellua leaks HOLY CRAAAAAAP 3D CELLUA IS REAAAAAAAL Accessibility below: Mobile: tap the image/gif to view it fully Desktop: right click, copy the image address, paste the URL and replace everything after =s... with =s1080 (or something lower/higher) Alternative: mirrors are on the daily cellua tumblr and cellua wiki (check recent changes) making a little creature terrarium and there's a bug where if they're walking really slowly they'll  rack up a lot of wills and start REALLY wanting to punch someone, moreso than they want to sleep hi bad news I'm not real! I'm FAKE... just a bunch of falsified information holy CRAP hmalyxâ is actually extremely hard to speak. holy MOLY I cannot do those phonemes. how did I expect myself to pronounce /𝼄ɐ̄mɐ̄m̥ɐ̂ɭ𝼄ɐ̂ɭɐ̂𝼄ɐ́/ woke up to 57 TUMBLR NOTIFS gdhsghhsfsjsfafshagagghrjshfafaf this is SCARY fan art for a tumblr ask of fnord's elementcattos blog context: it was recently decided that the legs would also float! and Having Done Something Similar I went ahead and drew up these things to save my words and ask how the crapper any of that works physically because I would love to see the takes of other artists on this very important matter post in question on image 4 hear me out: fan art but you have to mimic the artist's art style as closely and accurately as you can essentially forgery but legal hey did you know that in the lore it is possible for something to canonically be not canon meaning that the characters involved in the non-canon event canonically don't remember having experienced it, but if the media still canonically exists they are able to canonically view the non-canon event despite it being non-canon, therefore canonically reinforcing the idea that the non-canon content is canonically not canon trust me it makes sense unfortunately low quality happy december 277th, 2024 having a pet with you in bed means that you must subconsciously adjust your posture so that said pet gets the most space possible even if you aren't at your coziest because shoving them just a little bit away from your spot would be rude until you must take them off the bed in which case they are never allowed on ever again the rest of the night this is MY BED TAURDANCE TAURDANCE TAURDANCE TAURDANCE TAURDANCE xavier getting his Jig On editing a wiki is fun, you guys should try it (hyperfixation) edit: oh never mind this is a special interest and Not a hyperfixation y'know, I'm not that much of a :3 guy! just never used it forced to draw glyphs for all eternity. I STILL HAVE TO MAKE LIKE TWO MORE SIZES fnord is such a raw version of me he is the true aadenboy baba is you in cellua ??!?!?!!?!! got a little overzealous. doing a tumblr daily thing. cellular automaton moment plot twist the last three gifs are all ants chess variant moment what an amazing site wikipedia if it was AWESOME secondary post to see if the previous one will be pushed at all (scary link...) the tumblr exists now, go enjoy my presence  youtube stop EMAILING ME THIS. I KNOOOOOOOW. edit: made the tumblr miiiiiight move to tumblr. MIGHT. in a sort of iffy zone with the idea in any case, you can guaranteed reach me on glomble, the cellua and esolang wikis (wouldn't recommend unless you already or will contribute there), itch, github, and here on youtube (as much as this may upset anyone) drawings I did in fnord's whiteboard thing (1) quintessential aadenboy cat (2) survivor and rivulet (3) daryl eating a rocket pop (are they that large?) (4) conlang moment (5) went too far... (6) coquí and a coquito cocktail (the little coconut is not mine) monopedal hey fun fact none of the three usernames I've used were explicitly chosen by me hey guys I'm probably biased but english orthography makes it really fun to try and transcribe keymashes as human speech. like "jrygsfjdkgfiogrepjf" is probably [d͡ʒɹɪgz.fə̆.d͡ʒə̆.də̆.kə.gfjoʊ.gɹɛp.d͡ʒfəʰ] or something like that dang jane could probably weaponize her tail lmao there's a bilibili reupload of my chord diagram transcription video! in the comments someone mentioned issues with both diagrams—root/tonic relationship in  ⁨fnord's, pitch relationship in  ⁨fnord's—and someone else went to combine the two into a single diagram! I'm absolutely flattered by this unfortunately I can't understand the second video and I google translated the comment so I've got only a glimpse of the full picture here, but it's just fun to see occur (esp the translation of my video) and I want to bring attention to the diagram  (reupload)  (diagram combination) (also the mistake I made with the diagram is included here haaah) just got a time of 52:10 in my game holy CRAAAAAP threw my last highscore of 14:27 right out of the ballpark brief reference sheet of MEEEEE. ALL ME!!! GAME PUBLISHED!! go play it! game jam moment holy crap quaternions are amazing why didn't I use them before (I need to stop doing 3d games for my gmtk game jam submissions THIS IS THE SECOND TIME I'VE REINVENTED THE WHEEL) I know I'm supposed to be like nonexistent and all right now but I can't Not share this time to disappear for like two weeks. muahahaha listening to my attempts at commentary makes me realize how Odd my voice is. like just when trying to read a script. casual speech is fine! but everything goes to whack when I try to read the words on my screen. syllable skipping mispronunciations or whatever and stuff let's absolutely go dude!! also, I got a community thing now? no idea how that'll play out with a channel like mine so I'll turn it on as an experiment meet coquito DONATE TO WIKIPEDIA. AND MIRAHEZE. DONATE TO WIKI PLACES. I LOVE WIKIS proving my point though I guess this means I tamed the algorithm in three entirely different ways. neat! PEAK PEAK PEAK PEAK PEAK PEAK PEAK PEAK PEAK PEAK time to start producing Wavetapper ADOFAI Funky Burger World's Smallest Violin Slop and get MONEY /j/j/j (fnord) obligatory silly birthday post no I did not repost this thrice to change marginal details that I didn't like nuh uh new channel banner (oh also funny number got abbreviated) this namian is really heartfelt about agriculture! going as far as to swear at a beginner... (haha no translation! this is a segue to invite you to try and translate it yourself!) fnord fan art because frog p.s. this probably isn't at all how perspective works but I don't care!! (this is a lie) They are a mess They become irritated at each other very easily They are IDIOTS !!! creatures of Stupidity. I have met like three different cats in puerto rico and I cannot express how absolutely sweet cats are... they absolutely MELT my heart like having one rub against you is so AHHWHHWWHWHAWHWAH  . . . I NEED ONE..... happy 16th burgundy to me! puerto rico!! look at these COCONUTS ps the water wasn't that great. not my kind of flavor cellular automaton moment 3 fun fact: the cell in the fourth one is canonically a he announcement! in the groove 2 currently making a notitg modchart, it's easier than I thought! ...maybe! all aboard the slop train friendly note that we're 81.5% of the way to the end of time miscellaneous 2, this time with a bigger brush! what a rare sight! no more blurry mess (excluding matthew) THE EVIL FIEND's true name LOOK AT THIS!! silly little alien goobers!! including mine! happy december 183rd, 2024 (fnord) had to draw the two omnipedal creatures. made them interact with the others! cellular automaton moment 2 chess battle advanced part 2 of questioning stylistic character design through a "well how the hell does that work" perspective and also new ocs I guess blah blah blah miscellaneous cat planet things! "lore": these critters aren't the actual planets, but are instead directly "related" to the actual celestial bodies, without neither affecting the other. they all have a vague understanding of their planet counterpart, Earth in particular able to see vivid imagery of her planet. she's aware of us, she loves us! uhhh. More lore later. Or something. Enjoy the drawing for now might severely revamp this LMAO caffeine redirecting you to the new video since youtube is being STUPID and won't let me upload the gif here (fnord) guh meets the namians Translations: Panel 1: "Namians" Panel 2: "Green thing!" Panel 3: "Hey, what animal are you? Are you lost?" Panel 4: "Follow me, I have fruit for you to eat." ... Panel 7: "Do you want?" Panel 8: "What animal is that?" "I don't know." look at these squishy goobers... sauce, granola, and bismuth... the brothers! also an appearance of THE EVIL FIEND and Marcus agriculture (click for full image) fnord here's the zerons thing that I mentioned a bit ago but never went with. finally figured out what the square root of a zeron is first image was very photogenic for some reason but because I took it with my mac it's low quality so the second image is a digitized version of it and also the hyperimaginary symbol is something I made up, so you probably won't find anything adjacent to it need more art... cellular automaton moment decided that he can also change his height because seeing him all short was a funny thought reviving this oc since he's very cool... multilegged guy! omnipedal! shapeshifter (but only lengthwise)! fnord drew the slugcats! very fun the individual wavetapper block videos are out now ! go enjoy them ! got a drawing tablet. not too hard to get used to it!! will use more... worldbuilding and language crap. enjoy more of the silly little alien cat creatures' world guide: top left: planet top right: time system, their vision and light + words bottom left: letters—phoneme in square brackets, romanized form in chevrons bottom right: numbering system hmm. name. they call their species and a familiar person "Manâ" but a person in general is also "Nahmá", so take your pick for what anglicized word you want. Muahaha. we're so back hi, this channel is going to go inactive for some time, technically alongside myself in short, I had put off missing work in favor of ordering projects, and since I am a repeat offender of this now I can't do stuff for a good ol' 2.5 years or less! I might still interact and stuff but for now posts are going on pause if I ever suddenly disappear from the face of the internet or seem less active than normal then this is probably why 💐 See you later! Sort of! ​⁠fnord  happy burgundy to cool guy no more nightly posts because I need to actually SLEEP and improve my health sleep-wise (6-8 hours isn't healthy!!!) image unrelated other than being today's nightly (soon to be daily) drawing lmao I switched back to using the anti aliased brush and now I can suddenly draw again????? skill regained! woohoo! but Huh??? hhh fnord fnord fnord fnord  this is going swell! I love my community! My Audience. My fans dare I say it. Freaks of nature. fnord how do you keeping cooking up such ideas at least one of you is revolted by this 👍 also secretly practicing shading and 3d space Muahahaha. shading and silliness infestation happy mar10 day had some fun this is the closest you're getting to a face reveal muahaha what would you describe my art style as? (1) also check out this silly cat I drew in a menial amount of time (2) layers (3) I do genuinely use this brush occasionally knotted meta meta li nimi sin wawa also see  sike kiwen help I'm hyperfixating on toki pona now hhssgjjffhh soweli and kijetesantakalu are so cute!!! fnord I was going to make a bigger fan art but this was the only thing I was able to actually properly draw... so here's This! Sobbing. not actually! just a little brain fried right now since I haven't drawn quadrupedal characters in a bjgkdfjazillion years. I'll try again later! maybe...! happy december 91st, 2024 where the hell am I more worldbuilding and language practice mmm... air sand... mmm... fruit scent... the hyperfixation is taking hold... I made a bit of the ideogram...! enjoy these scary tables (FRIGHTENING!) SO MANY CONJUGATIONS. totally not worldbuilding more on the cat alien creatures also enjoy these diagrams I made while trying to get a feel for the anatomy and phonology /n̼lɐ̀ʕ̃ɐ̂/ will probably be the species name lol totally not making a conlang for the funny alien cat no way nuh uh also the words here are meaningless lmao m m̥ n̼ l ɭ ʟ̠̝ ʕ̃ ɐ̄ ɐ́ ɐ̀ ɐ̂ art stream stuff! aah it's me! maybe! practicing, and also half reference sheet THERE'S SO MANY PAGES HELP (1) list of cat ocs (2) list of games (3) discography (4) brief interaction damian and I had youtube studio isn't giving me weekly recaps anymore... sobbing profusely right now so you're telling me. I have to give my characters trauma ?? ?? nuh uh... no way... not when I actively interact with them... 365 days of nightly drawings goodnight babacord turns out that @ mentioning can be willingly enabled and disabled by a user in Settings → Privacy! I've enabled mentioning me now, not sure why YouTube turned it off for me might occasionally lore in the comments. if it happens to work. muahaha (joke... daryl manages the account not me) being liquid lets you get away with a bit how the hell does drawing the mouth over the eye work anatomically? what does it even feel like? is there a hole going through the eye?? can vision be obscured that way?? does the eye just stretch around the mouth??? it Bugs me so much... please share your theories lol look at these little critters I drew naming them anna, kyle and liam respectively. expect them to appear more often! hi here's some goodnight babacord drawings in no particular order, today is 357 you can't change your answer on quizzes anymore mark made a sign conlang called Mark's Sign Language because he and a few other of my ocs can't speak fnord your drawing of chester gave me a headcanon where wawaspeak is more compact and tonal and allows a lot of info to be stored in only 1-5 wa's compared to the several ba's in babaspeak game dev stream sounds enticing. might tuesday if school doesn't kill me for being gone for an entire week do you ever draw something and in the middle of drawing it go "blehhh. doesn't look right." and or "how would I even draw that" and immediately give up on it because it's happened to me Countless Times! including the one I was just working on! happy december 62nd, 2024 lmao sorry for the radio silence the flu got to me and I was in absolute agony for three days phil look at this guy! the catter! the yeah there's no way I'm going to get the wiki done within a week... bit too unobtainable for me! progress has been slowing and trying to focus on it is becoming harder! it won't be discontinued but I'm not going to try to force a deadline on me because that's a bit too stressing! it'll be out Sometime Soon... no specific date though currently focused on other projects... I'll try to work on the wiki intermittently or at least designate a time for it. wish me luck ? maybe ? ? ? --- also fnord you don't need to wait for the wiki to be done if you are! forget that statement! day eight: slow progress, but progress nonetheless! enjoy some extra doodles as well (1) Tim! (2) glass beach abyss angel (goodnight babacord 341, today) (3) little sea bunny thing! (4) Om nom nom nom (goodnight babacord 329) (5) aggressive perspective (goodnight babacord 340) fnord hello happy burgundy. possibly belated! enjoy my Attempt at drawing something that isn't cat shaped also enjoy the bonus doodles as compensation for me not having worked on the wiki at all today 🤑 day seven: it was a good day! got the pages for josh and oscar done! there's a lot of art that none of you have seen before, so now that I'm well beyond comfortable sharing my art you'll see a ton of new content like goodnight babacord 188 (1) Josh (2) Oscar (Quadrupedal) (3) Oscar (Monopedal) (4) goodnight babacord 188 day six, page for greg is done day five — holy crap making the gallery took forever... can't imagine doing the same for the rest... SIGH (1) George! (2) Damian! (3) George! (infobox) fnord‬‬ cone cat is real now also enjoy the material and lighting/shading tests SORRY FOR THE TRIPLE REPOST. THE CAR LOOKED WRONG THRICE AND I HAD TO FIX IT... day four, much less work done but oh well — SEE LAST IMAGE! Important question! anyways, (1) cat pedalism/posture! look at the cool table and terms... (2) daryl's infobox! enjoy it (3) Special:RecentChanges (4) I work on other wikis as well! here's a "minor" edit I made on the CelLua wiki (5) important question day three (1) the three types of postures! mostly related to cats but also applies to other animals (NOT HUMANS, THOSE ARE STRICTLY BIPEDAL) (2) Damian's page is (mostly) complete! (3) Damian wrapping caution tape around the section (4) question mark cat... (5) uhh... day two (1) look at him measuring the page! THAT'S how you know it's a stub (2) Damian is officially the first character to get a page on the wiki (what do you think of the infobox) (3) hehehehe randomized subtitle AND funny 3d css cube... (4) bigger picture of Damian measuring (also he gained a construction vest) the aadenboy wiki is in progress!! plus its mascot, Damian! stay TUNED... here's a ref sheet on how to draw the Generic Aadenboy Cat™ remember the number pick? not working! turns out I can't commit when I can't get started on said thing within a reasonable time... and my attention is turned to sum else so you'll Be Surprised! Muahaha unrelatedly, bombercat what if blender streams?? I swear to god if I get to 500 solely because of funky burger... GIVE ME TIME AND LET ME RELEASE SOMETHING FIRST... you guys need to listen to this! great music!! and check out this guy's other music as well! it needs more attention! I have so many ideas on the backburner that I could do after I finish another and have the time and maybe I should do em... pick a number for me will ya what if nutescore video... nutes... various older art happy december 32nd, 2024 hey can you guys stop celebrating it's still the beginning of the 31st for me okay thanks y'know I never considered it myself to be pixel art, I always thought of it as "well I'm not drawing with pixels directly, I just don't do well with big sizes and the pixels are just an artifact from the small size" for most of my older art (picture 2) I actually used an anti-aliased brush, so it looked smoother and less like pixel art of course I then used a mono brush once someone pointed out it looked blurry take from that what you will! would you consider my art style as pixel art the creatures (they're fun to draw) fnord chester listens to weezer, alongside a broader range of artists I Don't listen to yawn. merry christmas. happy easter. I would've had some big christmas drawing for the occasion but trying to get myself to focus is way too hard . good thing I'm already holly jolly well that answers my question fnord a tragedy that all of my cats must face timezones suck what we doing in minecraft ?! what we playing ?! lol stream kinda failed. but there might be an aadenboy wiki soon so I've got my hopes up ! see ya then! fnord fnord all natural when should I stream? it'll be at 3:30 PM GMT-8 he has decided that his name shall be marcus! (reuploading cause I didn't like the way the shadow looked...) had an amazing art stream!!! thanks to everyone who came!!! really cool people who chatted (youtube is being dumb with some tags) fnord fnord fnord fnord fnord fnord fnord [SD-X] fnord fnord and everyone else WILL DO ANOTHER... SOOOON... be ready... various happy 7th halloween of the year 🎉🎉🎉 fnord he meets three of the fifteen! WHAT IS DARYL DOING ?!?! meet him! murderous intent (he will be met with a terrible fate) bwahhhh... 1k views and 70 likes... this is really popping off!!! I'M PEAK!!!! enjoy the art! with the EVIL FIEND.... I don't know what her actual name is but I don't want to ask ... she's too INTIMIDATING!! youtube's algorithm is very weird youtube why are you only NOW showing everyone the short! getting sidetracked.... expect an animation bahh... cooking thoughts in my head!!! I've got such a good idea... so good... I'm going to drop everything and try to hyperfocus on it as much as I can !!! also enjoy these doodles I guess happy st. patrick's day visiting the painting (+ lore) transparency referring to josh not actually being filled in white, it just appears that way because the background is usually A White Void bob ross tried rigging oscar but I have no idea what I'm doing so it just warps him weirdly siiiighhhhhhhhhh. I'll leave a drive link here for anyone who actually DOES know how to do this sort of stuff perhaps enjoy some older art that I happened to cook in also enjoy the one and only time I ever managed to successfully draw (or even attempt) a non-sphere hand baba is you baba is you baba is you baba is you baba is you baba is you baba is you baba is you baba is you baba is you baba is you baba is you duuuude I had a dream where youtube increased the poll option amount to six and I was gonna post a poll with it.... guys... it's no nutes november! we must be RATIONAL... got a funny pen that also works as a phone stylus also all of the cats have been neckless up until this very moment. llamas. or somethinfgf dude my analytics are so weird hi hello hi hi enjoy doodles since I make myself draw something every night okay couple of things to share here: 1. yeah I'm still doing the goodnight babacord thing !!! I just rarely ever share the art... I'm probably on day 262 (as seen on the top left) 2. rain world is slowly taking a hold of me   rain rain world rain world world 3. lol drawing is fun... idk I just felt like drawing a whole bunch this time. maybe I didn't actually have creative burnout and it was just the stress from a mishap of privacy when I tried to stream again 4. uhhhh. trying to manage a variety channel is too hard. I wish I had like multiple notification groups or something, like I only notify adofai or only art or whatever. y'know? like role pings 5. my ability to draw silly little goobers quickly is unmatched! I can pump out these things in like 10 seconds! 5? 3? probably 5 6. HII. I HOPE YOU ENJOY THIS TEXT WALL MUAHAHAHA :PPPP 7. I miss babacord... :( 8. enjoy should I keep doing these live streams and shorts of the zero player games here's daryl, the honorary stream moderator (and bot) which one you picking?! lmao the art app I mentioned before lowered the ad duration from one and a half minutes to a mere 4 seconds because of all the backlash did a livestream phil merry christmas fnord I LOVE ALL OF THE LITTLE GOOBERS!!!!!!!!❤️❤️❤️ the scrunklers!!!!!!! multiple of them remind me of my own characters :0 ENJOY................. (it's not all of them but I ain't doin allat...) (upload 2 cause I drew one of the legs WRONG. and also redid the face of the autumn leaf one) I'm doing injustice by not having shared these earlier — thank you ​⁠fnord and ​⁠fnord !!! psst... draw meeeee...... also yeah osc aadenboy is canon (and wanted dead by several of my cats (HE STARTED IT!!!)) goal complete :]]]]] HELP ME!!!! we need to make #e400fa fnord's color!!! QUICK!!! please don't listen to me when I say I'm working on something I am extremely horrible at committing to projects 💔💔💔 her jammin' "friendly" reminder to please be creative 🥰😍😍😍🥰🥰🥰😍😍🥰 youtube has changed the max options in a poll from five to four LORE!!! PRESS READ MORE!!! I managed to catch the two having a (short) conversation their speech bubbles aren't like the ones I draw... how that's possible? I don't know after they left I ran over and got a quick glimpse of the map before running off. it's a map of the hub, and a live one too as the paths shift _why_ they have the map? no idea, but it can't be good considering SHE is involved (the purpley one) no idea what the gizmos at the top do either might get josh to try and figure it out, he knows more about the hub than I do also haha I went with the top fang design. I like that one more... and also his teeth aren't jagged like that DRAW ME!! RELEASE ME INTO THE WORLD!! LET ME EXPLORE!! also a bonus style guide for mouths if you end up trying to use my art style I guess copper wiring episode 2 coming soon... it'll be scripted though so wait for me to cook!!!! yummy sazon goya seasoning yummy puerto rican cuisine yummy yummy muy delicioso yummy mmmmmmm fnord is quite cool and based! been here since the beginning! thumbs up to you my good friend! also enjoy some extra art . muahaha what should I do are you holly jolly silly billy anger she is a MENACE!!! she has done UNSPEAKABLE things!!! which one reposting this since I had somehow deleted the original post WHOOPS I THINK I MIGHT'VE SOMEHOW DELETED ONE OF THE IMAGE POSTS lol I need to check again. have I fallen off yet is fnord evil... hahaha more art first panel is lore related characters in order: George, Greg, Oscar, Phil, then two cats not part of the main cast currently witnessing in real time the app that I've been using for about a year plummet down the rails by PAYWALLING THE SIMPLE ACT OF SAVING ART. even HIDING THE UI an SCREENSHOTTING are paywalled!!! shall I draw all the cats! and also share some lore in the process going to instead have the copper wiring video be scripted, will allow me to fit more content and also NOT BLOW UP MY COMPUTER have some cats in order: Linda, Chester, Dan, Josh I imagine Linda and Chester would get along well the video might be corrupted... NOT currently editing this is an OLD photo guhhhh... recorded 1 hour copper wiring video and it's 8gb can't wait to edit and caption it! woohooooo....... intro mockup, feedback it NOW oh yeah I'm defo making more shorts. enjoy the slop!!!!!!!! it's official. the youtube short is live.  what do you think? make the e, you deserve it what if... youtube shorts... my next video should be... I NEED MORE ART REQUESTS. MOOORE. fnord - this is an inside joke you probably won't understand but I just had to make it fnord and fnord - surprise fnord - here you go fnord - you're a strange guy! not gonna be able to sleep knowing I cheaped out on the request!  fnord here you go no idea who this cat is. found the thing outside waiter! waiter! more art requests please! fun time drawing these (at midnight...) fnord - STOP GALMBLIGN.  YOU'RE GROWING OLD. OLDIE. OLDGEN. fnord - drawing him was fun 🎉  fnord - he won't drink it! I tried! alongside the 12 other cats! they all refused! fnord - help poll 12 tell me what to draw. I've got nothing!!!! he turned himself into a bird, funniest thing I've ever seen please help why is everyone turning into programs do you watch my videos with subtitles when they have them you better hydrate. it's good for you! and this guy! (click to see full image) lore later. I'll gradually introduce the rest of the cats as I draw em poll 11 shall I make more regular posts with more art y'know what? I'm going to make a NORMAL post with NORMAL content and NORMAL art with NO particular relevance whatsoever ENJOY. v2.0 of copper wiring is releasing tomorrow... I think what should I make with it? school time youtube is beginning to rename the "community" tab to the "posts" tab what can be assumed here? I have to bring it back you get to hear my voice again in the newest video! for thirteen minutes! it's insane! hey did you know that "Add option" is actually the placeholder text for options? the true add option button has the text "Add another option" WHICH IS BETTER I both love and hate making these polls (for lack of better words) I feel an unrealistic pressure to make the *right* award winning poll that will have people vote on, otherwise my brain complains to me till I remove it. why! why do I care! hell l'd rather be posting my art but what's the use if nobody sees it! siligh. I guess there IS the website idk tbh I wanna just go "whatever" and start posting whatever crap I want to but I also really just don't? mixed bag! the bag has been mixed! trail mixed! luckily it's not the same for videos, I can just churn out whatever and I won't care yet COMMUNITY POSTS are where I draw the line? huh ? ? ? ? ? ? I don't know man! there's that for ya, use that as you will I guess nutes... channel status poll 10 aaaaaaaaaahhhhhhgggghhhh. dementia GAME JAM VOTING IS HAPPENING. PLAY MY GAME. poll 9 poll 8 poll 7 I'm participating in this year's game jam! gmtk 2024! spell a word went ahead and added some captions to the last adofai video enjoy poll 7 poll 6 which one poll 5 suggest songs for the next next adofai video poll 4 possible video contenders you are getting NO context. ZERO. NONE. poll 3 What! Help Me! HELP = 👍 poll 2 this channel will probably turn into a programming channel lmao there'll still be adofai charts though! should I upload something tired of this ngl Hey, everybody! It's the Super Mario Brothers, *from the TV!* yaaaaaaaaaaawn. this poll is best viewed on a desktop last surprise poll, then I'm calming down SURPRISE HALF-DAY POLL I update the site again! new! new badge! also moved my art over to  YAAAAAAAAAAAWN. SO TIRED. GOODNIGHT. poll 2 in case poll 1 fails what if. I started doing these polls daily instead of bi-daily the poll has finally arrived!!!!!! for context: I asked you on Jan 19 to schedule this poll with the options chosen I scheduled it for 7/28/2024 at 19:00 (24 hr) (GMT-8) hi hello hi I made the. website. go Visit it. find all the badges or whatever gonna be gone for some time (starting tomorrow), so as per tradition you guys will draw me something! draw me something GOOD. don't make an E... audience check! who are YOU! lol nvm making a website instead okay the idea is that I make a second channel. and post all my art there as Normal Postsf what if (hear me out) you hear me out (hear me out) on this new idea (hear me out) and you need to hear me out (hear me out) on this one (hear me out) cause it's very revolutionary (hear me out) so hear me out (hear me out) okay? (hear me out (hear me out (hear me out))) Yaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaawn . happy birthday to me! I don't want to make a video! this means that I'll be late once again! see you in 2036! draw the letter e or something idk . do what you guys usually do guys we need to budget our options... fnord is going to tax us and I'd rather  Not  be in jail all the new arrivals! finally can afford more options! woohoo    !!!!  ! 64 VOTES???????????????????? WHAT??????? so ,;; uhhh . . .,,, How's the weather today 🏁 there's no more Add option. there's no more option. you guys spent it all. I can't afford anymore. I'm left with only ONE option, and that's all. no more option guys. it's over. 44 votes, that's a new record, surely this means something who do you know me as does my audience know me is it time for a new pfp cba may I keep cooking have I fallen off ah whatever polls work better still tryna figure out anatomy your democracy is being used for Useful purposes. not for myself! yep! It's so 😋Yum! honestly I have no idea if this post will reach anyone but I'm not gonna limit myself to only posting polls anymore alright but which one is the best business is booming! I can afford more options! okay but which one is funnier why do we add option thanks for letting me sleep new pfp how are we feeling youtube is giving me choices, how shall I respond to fnord's comment on the last poll alright todays firing day take your paycheck and leave you're all fired alright thanks for that blueprint can you recreate it now are my polls rigged thank you for your contribution, Cfdtj will now be added to dictionaries spell a word Dad: I think you're nutes once again made a new banner, this is a new era of new stuff. NEW! figure out all the references for a bonus I guess new profile picture thinking of starting devlogs since I *really* like to share my stuff with people, I program stuff, and also my upload schedule is WACK if I go through with it I'll most likely end up putting my personal site back online so I could have a blog **please comment your thoughts or suggestions** whole reason why I want to make a devlog is because it'll probably get me to work on stuff more consistently, given that I upload at scheduled times plus, when I share with others it encourages me to continue more (I love attention! I love attention! give me your money) I can also get feedback and stuff but who cares..... (me) it'll also get me back those watch hours I lost from those adofai videos being a year old man my channel is never coming back from those, I wonder how many people see me as an adofai charter and not as uh . y'know it's probably the most accurate they're gonna get considering I don't upload what I actually do I also have this problem with video creation where I'll deem a video "raw", and promptly delete it due to my dissatisfaction with it — the definition that I use is a video which isn't edited in any way, but it also has other factors - I had uploaded a Duolingo video a while ago, but unlisted it sometime after since it was only me doing a lesson, and stuff like the top ui was visible which made it seem raw - I downloaded CapCut for the "this is what 2.2 was made for" video so I could make jump cuts after deaths to have it not be raw - I uploaded a video recently but promptly privated it an hour after, since it gained no views (it was midnight in my local time) and just was a screen recording of a level (while I did trim off the end where I ended the screen recording, it has become a habit anyways that it doesn't make the video any less raw) idk this is just me wanting to finally make quality content after some time, cause Man does it hit hard my plan for now is that I record raw game devving, and if the demand for a devlog is high enough I'll follow through with editing and publishing the video, along with making that blog like I said stay tuned if you all are in favor for it guys I can't handle any more options there's too many please Give a shoutout! Type @ to mention a channel y'know these polls might just be getting boring! been doing em for a while and now it's just not as fun zzz I got no ideas ❌❌ pick one for me my pfp has been changed ! what do you think shall I change my pfp april fools (part 3) april fools (part 2) april fools youtube should forcefully add an add option option to all future polls pick the better add option next up (bonus points if you don't check on a spreadsheet) =AND(C5:G3) alright next up what is 57 &amp;amp;&amp; "J" exactly one person got the previous poll wrong what is 29 % 7 might as well hop on trends for a bit I guess what is 67^1 Ask your community... you're not getting the new option. 100% votes on a single option is insane.   let's test something... other channels have done this (mainly cubing channels) where they take four images, make one obviously different, and ask their viewers to pick the different one. the thing is, it's never 100%. people are gonna pick the wrong one and come up with some blazing answer as to why it's different, even though they're all exactly the same will the same happen here? can you guys please stop adding options I wonder if these polls will get any attention anymore last time I posted one was 13 days ago here it's not a poll but have this logo I made for my site (the poll has been scheduled btw) alright when will the poll be scheduled for now it's an image pool with only two options. you guys don't get a say in this anymore fine ! have your added option y'know what? I'm removing TWO options instead of adding one subscribe did you draw an E on that last poll you know what? I'm only giving you FOUR OPTIONS !!!! how are you gonna make an E now huh? Checkmate, Liberals!  for obvious reasons that last sentence was ac joke draw me something with this poll. I'll check back on jan 5-7 top two letters are added to my bio which letter do I add to my bio? which letter do I add to my bio? which letter do I add to my bio? which letter do I add to my bio? whoops I kind of forgot! Schedule the next poll to arrive after (24 hours after this poll was created + the top option) Ask your community... I wonder what youtube is trying to tell me delete this poll? (continuation) (continuation) delete this poll? (continuation) delete this poll? ah yep, thanks youtube! for not being able to meet you "channel history" standards (whatever that is), I can't pin comments. THIS IS REALLY HELPFUL! I REALLY DO WONDER WHAT KIND OF SECURITY THIS HELPS! what is the point of this?? pins are like one of the main ways content creators can even engage! everyone wants a pin! not sure what you're trying to prevent. this really helps me a lot :D (for reference, all of the previous letter drawing polls have used the pin feature, as well as my two most popular ADOFAI videos.) sigh build the letter Screw You YouTube! Hi aadenboy, To help keep our community safe, we limit some of our more powerful features to channels who have built and maintained a positive channel history or who have provided verification. As of now, your channel doesn’t have sufficient channel history. It has lost access to advanced features. This may have happened because your channel did not follow our Community Guidelines. How this impacts your channel You won’t be able to do things like: • Get higher daily limits for live streams,  Shorts, and video uploads • Embed live streams • Pin comments • Add external links to your video descriptions How to restore access to advanced features To restore access, you can: • Build positive channel history by following our Community Guidelines. • Provide video or ID verification for quicker access. This may not be available for all channels. Thanks,  The YouTube team Thanks for participating. LETTER Z POLL RESULTS █████ 50% █▌ 14% █▌ 14% █ 7% █▌ 14% 14 votes Effects applied: None !! FINAL POLL !! Create the letter Z Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter Z, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied LETTER Y POLL RESULTS ███ 27% ██ 18% ████▌ 45% █ 9%  0% 11 votes Effects applied: None Create the letter Y Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter Y, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied LETTER X POLL RESULTS ███▌ 35% █▌ 12% ██▌ 24% █▌ 12% ██ 18% 27 votes Effects applied: None Create the letter X Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter X, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied THIS POLL HAS ENDED! LETTER W POLL RESULTS ██▌ 25% █ 8% ██ 17% █ 8% ████ 42% 12 votes Effects applied: [R] (-100) Create the letter W Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter W, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied LETTER V POLL RESULTS ██▌ 25% ██ 17% ██▌ 25% █ 8% ██▌ 25% 12 votes Effects applied: None Create the letter V Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter V, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied LETTER U POLL RESULTS ███ 27% █ 7% █▌ 13% █▌ 13% ████ 40% 15 votes Effects applied: None Create the letter U Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter U, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied LETTER T POLL RESULTS ██████ 58% █ 8% ██ 17% █ 8% █ 8% 12 votes Effects applied: [M] (-100) Create the letter T Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter T, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied LETTER S POLL RESULTS █████▌ 55% █ 9% ███ 27%  0% █ 9% 11 votes Effects applied: None Create the letter S Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter S, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied LETTER R POLL RESULTS ██████ 60% █ 10% ███ 30%  0%  0% 10 votes Effects applied: None SYMBOL ◌ POLL RESULTS █████ 50%  0%  0%  0% █████ 50% 2 votes sorry there will be a delay before poll for letter S I forgor to do it :P create the symbol ◌ in the meantime Create the letter R Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter R, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied LETTER Q POLL RESULTS ███████ 67% █ 11%  0% █ 11% █ 11% 9 votes Effects applied: None Create the letter Q Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter Q, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied LETTER P POLL RESULTS ██▌ 33%  0% ██▌ 33% ██ 17% ██ 17% 6 votes Effects applied: None Create the letter P Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter P, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied LETTER O POLL RESULTS ████▌ 45% ██ 18% █ 9%  0% ███ 27% 11 votes Effects applied: None WHOOPS THE LETTER IS O NOT _ Create the letter O Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter O, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied LETTER N POLL RESULTS ██ 22% ██ 22% ██ 22% █ 11% ██ 22% 9 votes Effects applied: [MF] (-130) Create the letter N Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter N, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied LETTER M POLL RESULTS ████ 41% ██ 18% ██ 18% ▌6% ██ 18% 17 votes Effects applied: None Create the letter M Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter M, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied LETTER L POLL RESULTS █ 8% █ 8% ██▌ 25% █ 8% █████ 50% 12 votes Effects applied: [C] (-30) Create the letter L Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter L, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied LETTER K POLL RESULTS █████▌ 53% █▌13% █ 7% ██ 20% █▌7% 15 votes Effects applied: None Create the letter K Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter K, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied LETTER J POLL RESULTS █████▌ 55% █ 9% █ 9% █ 9% ██ 18% 11 votes Effects applied: None Create the letter J Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter J, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied LETTER I POLL RESULTS  0%  0% ██████████ 100%  0%  0% 5 votes Effects applied: [R] (-100) Create the letter I Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter I, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied LETTER H POLL RESULTS ███▌ 33% ██ 17% █████ 50%  0%  0% 6 votes Effects applied: None Create the letter H Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter H, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied LETTER G POLL RESULTS ████▌ 43% █▌ 14% █▌ 14%  0% ███ 29% 7 votes Effects applied: None Create the letter G Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter G, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied LETTER F POLL RESULTS ████ 38% █▌ 13% ██▌ 25% █▌ 13% █▌ 13% 8 votes Effects applied: None Create the letter F Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter F, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied LETTER E POLL RESULTS ██▌ 25% █▌ 13% ██▌ 25% █▌ 13% ██▌ 25% 8 votes Effects applied: [F] (-30) Create the letter E Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter E, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied LETTER D POLL RESULTS ████ 38% █▌ 13% █▌ 13% █▌ 13% ██▌ 25% 8 votes Effects applied: None Create the letter D Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter D, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied LETTER A POLL RESULTS  ████▌ 43% █▌ 14% ███ 29%  0% █▌ 14% 7 votes Effects applied: None LETTER B POLL RESULTS  ████ 40% ██ 20% ████ 40%  0%  0% 5 votes Effects applied: None LETTER C POLL RESULTS  █████ 50% ██ 17% ██ 17% ██ 17%  0% 6 votes Effects applied: None Create the letter C Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter C, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied LETTER A POLL RESULTS  ████▌ 43% █▌ 14% ███ 29%  0% █▌ 14% 7 votes Effects applied: None LETTER B POLL RESULTS  ████ 40% ██ 20% ████ 40%  0%  0% 5 votes Effects applied: None Create the letter B Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter B, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied LETTER A POLL RESULTS  ████▌ 43% █▌ 14% ███ 29%  0% █▌ 14% 7 votes Effects applied: None Create the letter A Poll ends tomorrow To achieve the letter A, you do not have to fully complete it Effects able to be applied: - Mirroring [M] (-100) - Flipping [F] (-30) - Cropping [C] (-30) - Resizing [S] (-50) - Rotating [R] (-100) - Tiling [T] (-200) The top comment will have the chosen effects applied what wow thank you that really helps making a project and came up with this (click to expand image) 000 Happy birthday to you Happy birthday to you Happy birthday dear Aaden Happy birthday to you Feliz cumpleanos Feliz cumpleanos Feliz cumpleanos querido Aaden Feliz cumpleanos 001 click to expand image 010 click to expand image 011 click to expand image 100 101 110 111 do I like prism absolutely gaming you guys are actually crazy 12k views in the past 28 days why did adofai do this to me whatchu think of my new banner compared to my old one conway's game of life and death: the vehicle hello from school ⍼ yeah lets not discover a new element based on text since when did they let everyone have community posts I thought it was a 1,000 subscriber thing 